OṀ aiṁ mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
1.1 OṀ aiṁ. Mārkaṇḍeya said:
sāvarṇiḥ sūryatanayo yo manuh kathyate ’ṣṭamaḥ niśāmaya tad utpattiṁ vistarād gadato mama
1.2 Sāvarṇi, who is Sūrya’s son, is called the eighth manu. Listen while I relate the story of his birth
mahāmāyānubhāvena yathā manvantarādhipaḥ sa babhūva mahābhāgah sāvarṇis tanayo raveḥ
4
1.3 and of how, by Mahāmāyā’s authority, he—the illustrious son of the sun god—came to be the lord of an age.
svārociṣe ’ntare pūrvaṁ caitravaṁśasamudbhavaḥ suratho nāma rājābhūt samaste kṣitimaṇḍale
1.4 Long ago in the age of the manu Svarociṣba, there arose from the line of Caitra a king named Suratha, who ruled over the whole earth.
tasya pālayataḥ samyak prajāḥ putrānivaurasān babhūvuḥ śatravo bhūpāḥ kolāvidhvarhsinas tadā
1.5 He looked after his subjects justly, as if they were his own children. But there were princes at that time who attacked the native hill tribes and became his enemies.
tasya tair abhavad yuddham atiprabaladaṇḍinaḥ nyūnair api sa tair yuddhe kolāvidhvamsibhir jitaḥ
1.6 Though mightily armed and resolved to fight against them, he suffered defeat in battle, despite his enemies’ inferior forces.
tataḥ svapuram āyāto nijadeśādhipo ’bhavat ākrāntaḥ sa mahābhāgas tais tadā prabalāribhiḥ
1.7 And so, with only his native province left to rule, he returned to his own city. There, powerful adversaries set upon him, the illustrious Suratha,
amātyair balibhir duṣṭair durbalasya durātmabhiḥ kośo balam cāpahṛtaṁ tatrāpi svapure tataḥ
1.8 now bereft of strength. His ministers, mighty, corrupted, and disposed to evil, seized power and plundered the treasury, even there in his own city.
tato mṛgayāvyājena hṛtasvāmyaḥ sa bhūpatiḥ ekākī hayam āruhya jagāma gahanaṁ vanam
1.9 Thus robbed of his dominion, the king mounted his horse on the pretext of hunting and rode off alone into the dense forest.
5
sa tatrāśramam adrākṣīd dvijavaryasya medhasaḥ praśāntaśvāpadākīrṇaṁ muniśiṣyopaśobhitam
1.10 He came upon the hermitage of Medhas, chief among the twice-born, and beheld a forest retreat, graced by the sage’s disciples. There he saw beasts once wild now peacefully abiding.
tasthau kañcit sa kālaṁ ca muninā tena satkṛtaḥ itaś cetaś ca vicaraṁs tasmin munivarāśrame
1.11 Welcomed by the sage, he remained at the hermitage for some time, wandering here and there about the enclosure.
so ’cintayat tadā tatra mamatvākṛṣṭamānasaḥ
1.12 In that setting, self-centered concerns came to seize his mind, and he reflected:
matpūrvaiḥ pālitaṁ pūrvaṁ mayā hīnaṁ puraṁ hi tat madbhṛtyais tair asadvṛttair dharmataḥ pālyate na vā
1.13 I have left behind the capital that my ancestors governed before me. Are my perverse officials overseeing it justly or not?
na jāne sa pradhāno me śūro hastī sadāmadaḥ mama vairivaśaṁ yātaḥ kān bhogān upalapsyate
1.14 My prized elephant, valiant and of unceasing prowess, has fallen into the hands of my enemies. I know not what comforts he’ll now enjoy.
ye mamānugatā nityam prasādadhanabhojanaiḥ anuvṛttiṁ dhruvaṁ te ’dya kurvanty anyamahībhṛtām
1.15 Those retainers of mine, constantly eager for favor, wealth, and feasting, now surely submit to other lords.
6
asamyagvyayaśīlais taiḥ kurvadbhiḥ satataṁ vyayam sañcitaḥ so ’tiduḥkhena kṣayaṁ kośo gamiṣyati
1.16 Their habitual squandering will soon deplete the wealth I so laboriously amassed.
etac cānyac ca satatam cintayāmāsa pārthivaḥ tatra viprāśramābhyāśe vaiśyam ekaṁ dadarśa saḥ
1.17 While pondering those and other questions, the king caught sight of a lone merchant approaching the sage’s hermitage.
sa pṛṣṭas tena kastvaṁ bho hetuś cāgamane ’tra kaḥ saśoka iva kasmāt tvaṁ durmanā iva lakṣyase
1.18 “Who are you,” he asked, “and what brings you here? Why do you look so sorrowful and dejected?”
ity ākarṇya vacas tasya bhūpateḥ praṇayoditam pratyuvāca sa taṁ vaiśyaḥ praśrayāvanato nṛpam
1.19 Hearing the king speak in friendship, the merchant bowed respectfully and replied.
vaisya uvāca
1.20 The merchant said:
samādhir nāma vaisyo ’ham utpanno dhanināṁ kule putradārair nirastaś ca dhanalobhād asādhubhiḥ
1.21 “I am a merchant named Samādhi, born in a wealthy family. My wife and children grew wicked through avarice and cast me out.
vihīnaś ca dhanair dāraiḥ putrair ādāya me dhanam vanam abhyāgato duḥkhī nirastaś cāptabandhubhiḥ
7
1.22 Destitute of riches, wife, and children, my wealth taken from me, I have arrived in the forest, distressed and forsaken by trusted kinsmen.
so ’ham na vedmi putrāṇāṁ kuśalākuśalātmikām pravṛttiṁ svajanānāṁ ca dārāṇāṁ cātra samsthitaḥ
1.23 Being here, I know not whether good fortune or ill has befallen my children, wife, and family.
kiṁ nu teṣāṁ grhe kṣemam akṣemaṁ kiṁ nu sāmpratam
1.24 At present is well-being or misfortune theirs at home?
kathaṁ te kiṁ nu sadvṛttā durvṛttāḥ kiṁ nu me sutāḥ
1.25 How are my children? Is their behavior virtuous or vile?”
rāj ovāca
1.26 The king said:
yair nirasto bhavāṁl lubdhaiḥ putradārādibhir dhanaiḥ
1.27 “Those greedy sons, wife, and others who dispossessed you of your wealth—
teṣu kiṁ bhavataḥ sneham anubadhnāti mānasam
1.28 why does your mind still cherish them?”
vaiśya uvāca
1.29 The merchant said:
8
evam etad yathā prāha bhavān asmad gataṁ vacaḥ kiṁ karomi na badhnāti mama niṣṭhuratām manaḥ
1.30 “Even as you say it, this very thought occurs to me. But what can I do? My heart is not inclined to rancor
yaiḥ santyajya pitṛsnehaṁ dhanalubdhair nirākṛtaḥ patiḥ svajanahārdaṁ ca hārdi teṣv eva me manaḥ
1.31 but still turns with affection to those who drove me away, scorning love for father, husband, and kinsman, out of lust for wealth.
kim etan nābhijānāmi jānann api mahāmate yat premapravaṇaṁ cittaṁ viguṇeṣv api bandhuṣu
1.32 I recognize this, O wise one. Still, I do not understand how my thoughts are drawn in love to my unworthy kinsfolk.
teṣāṁ kṛte me niḥśvāso daurmanasyaṁ ca jāyate
1.33 Because of them I sigh, overcome with despair.
karomi kiṁ yan na manasteṣv aprītiṣu niṣṭhuram
1.34 What can I do, since the pain has failed to harden my heart?”
mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
1.35 Mārkaṇḍeya said:
tatas tau sahitau vipra taṁ muniṁ samupasthitau
1.36 Then together they approached the sage,
samādhir nāma vaiśyo ’sau sa ca pārthivasattamaḥ
9
1.37 that merchant named Samādhi and Suratha, the best of kings.
kṛtvā tu tau yathānyāyaṁ yathārhaṁ tena saṁvidam upaviṣṭau kathāḥ kāścic cakratur vaiśyapārthivau
1.38 Having observed the respect that was the sage’s due, the merchant and the king sat down to tell their stories.
rājovāca
1.39 The king said:
bhagavaṁs tvām ahaṁ praṣṭum icchāmy ekaṁ vadasva tat
1.40 “Revered sir, I wish to ask you one thing. Please reply.
duḥkhāya yan me manasaḥ svacittāyattatāṁ vinā
1.41 Without control of my thoughts, my mind is coming to grief.
mamatvam gatarājyasya rājyārigeṣv akhileṣvapi jānato ’pi yathājñasya kim etan munisattama
1.42 I remain possessive toward my lost kingdom and all parts of the realm as if unaware that they are no longer mine. Venerable sage, how can this be?
ayaṁ ca nikṛtaḥ putrair dārair bhṛtyais tathojjhitaḥ svajanena ca santyaktas teṣu hārdī tathāpyati
1.43 And this fellow has been humiliated by his children and wife, deserted by his servants, and forsaken by his own people. Still he feels exceeding affection for them.
evam esa tathāhaṁ ca dvāvapyatyantaduḥkhitau dṛṣṭadoṣe ’pi visaye mamatvākṛṣṭamānasau
1.44 It is the same with me. We both are distressed to the utmost, held by attachment to things, even though we see their faults.
10
tat kenaitan mahābhāga yan moho jñāninor api mamāsya ca bhavaty eṣā vivekāndhasya mūḍhatā
1.45 Venerable sir, how is it that we who should know better can be so deluded? Ours is the perplexity of those who are blind to right understanding.”
ṛṣir uvāca
1.46 The seer said:
jñānam asti samastasya jantor viṣayagocare viṣayās ca mahābhāga yānti caivaṁ pṛthak pṛthak
1.47 “Illustrious king, through the perceptions of the senses, every living being has knowledge of the manifest universe. The objects of sense-perception reveal themselves in various ways.
divāndhāḥ prāṇinaḥ kecid rātrāv andhās tathāpare kecid divā tathā rātrau prāṇinas tulyadṛṣṭayaḥ
1.48 Some creatures are blind by day, and others are blind by night. Some creatures see equally by day and night.
jñānino manujāḥ satyaṁ kintu te na hi kevalam yato hi jñāninaḥ sarve paśupakṣimṛgādayaḥ
1.49 Truly, humans are endowed with the power of perception, but they are not alone, for cattle, birds, wild animals, and all other living creatures also perceive.
jñānaṁ ca tan manusyāṇāṁ yat teṣāṁ mṛgapakṣiṇām manuṣyāṇāṁ ca yat teṣāṁ tulyam anyat tathobhayoḥ
1.50 That awareness which humans have, birds and beasts possess also; and their awareness, humans have, too. In other ways also the two are similar.
11
jñāne ’pi sati paśyaitān patangāñ chāvacañcusu kaṇamokṣād ṛtān mohāt pīḍyamānān api kṣudhā
1.51 Look at these birds. Though feeling the pangs of hunger, out of delusion they still busy themselves by dropping food into the beaks of their young.
mānuṣā manujavyāghra sābhilāṣāḥ sutān prati lobhāt pratyupakārāya nanv etān kiṁ na paśyasi
1.52 Illustrious sir, humans long for offspring, surely expecting gratitude in return. Do you not see this?
tathāpi mamatāvarte mohagarte nipātitāḥ mahāmāyāprabhāveṇa samsārasthitikāriṇā
1.53 In this very manner they are hurled into the whirlpool of attachment, the pit of delusion, by the power of Mahāmāyā, Who produces the continuing cycle of this transitory world.
tan nātra vismayaḥ kāryo yoganidrā jagatpateḥ mahāmāyā hareś caiṣā tayā sammohyate jagat
1.54 Do not be astonished. This same Mahāmāyā is Yoganidrā, the meditative sleep of Viṣṇu, the lord of the world. By Her this world is deluded.
jñāninām api cetāmsi devī bhagavatī hi sā balād ākṛṣya mohāya mahāmāyā prayacchati
1.55 She, the blessed Goddess Mahāmāyā, seizes the minds of even the wise and draws them into delusion.
tayā visṛjyate viśvaṁ jagad etac carācaram saiṣā prasannā varadā nṛṇāṁ bhavati muktaye
1.56 She creates all this universe, moving and unmoving, and it is She Who graciously bestows liberation on humanity.
sā vidyā paramā mukter hetubhūtā sanātanī
12
1.57 She is the supreme knowledge and the eternal cause of liberation,
saṁsārabandhahetuś ca saiva sarveśvareśvarī
1.58 even as She is the cause of bondage to this transitory existence. She is the sovereign of all lords.”
rājovāca
1.59 The king said:
bhagavan kā hi sā Devī mahāmāyeti yāṁ bhavān bravīti katham utpannā sā karmāsyāś ca kiṁ dvija
1.60 “Revered sir, Who is that Goddess whom you call Mahāmāyā? How did She originate, and in what ways does She Act?
yat prabhāvā ca sā Devī yat svarūpā yad udbhavā
1.61 And whatever Her Glory, this Goddess, whatever Her Form and Origin,
tat sarvaṁ śrotum icchāmi tvat to brahmavidāṁ vara
1.62 all that I wish to learn from you, who are supreme among the knowers of Brahman.”
ṛṣir uvāca
1.63 The seer said:
nityaiva sā jaganmūrtis tayā sarvam idaṁ tatam
1.64 “She Is Eternal, having the world as Her Form. She Pervades All This.
13
tathāpi tat samutpattir bahudhā śrūyatāṁ mama
1.65 Yet She Emerges in various ways. Hear it from me.
devānāṁ kāryasiddhyartham āvirbhavati sā yadā utpanneti tadā loke sā nityāpy abhidhlyate
1.66 Although She Is Eternal, when She Manifests to accomplish the purpose of the Gods, She Is said to be Born in the world.
yoganidrāṁ yadā viṣṇur jagaty ekārṇavīkṛte āstīrya śeṣam abhajat kalpānte bhagavān prabhuḥ
1.67 At the end of the cosmic day, when the universe dissolved into the primordial ocean, the blessed lord Viṣṇu stretched out on the serpent Śeṣa and entered into meditative sleep.
tadā dvāv asurau ghorau vikhyātau madhukaiṭabhau visṇukarṇamalodbhūtau hantuṁ brahmāṇam udyatau
1.68 Then two fearsome asuras, the notorious Madhu and Kaiṭabha, issued forth from the wax in Viṣṇu’s ears, intent on slaying Brahmā,
sa nābhikamale viṣṇoḥ sthito brahmā prajāpatiḥ dṛṣṭvā tāv asurau cograu prasuptam ca janārdanam
1.69 who was seated on the lotus that grew from Viṣṇu’s navel. When he saw the raging asuras and the sleeping Viṣṇu,
tuṣṭāva yoganidrāṁ tām ekāgrahṛdayaḥ sthitaḥ vibodhanārthāya harer harinetrakrtālayām
1.70 Brahmā could think of nothing but to awaken him, and to that end he extolled Yoganidrā, Who had settled over Viṣṇu’s eyes
viśveśvarīṁ jagaddhātrīṁ sthitisaṁhārakāriṇīm nidrāṁ bhagavatīṁ viṣṇor atulāṁ tejasaḥ prabhuḥ
14
1.71 as his blessed sleep. The resplendent lord Brahmā extolled Her Who rules the universe, Who Sustains and Dissolves it. He extolled Her Who Is Incomparable.
brahmovāca
1.72 Brahmā said:
Tvaṁ svāhā Tvaṁ svadhā Tvaṁ hi Vaṣaṭkāraḥ Svarātmikā sudhā Tvam akṣare nitye tridhāmātrātmikā sthitā
1.73 ‘You Are The Mantras of Consecration to the Gods and the ancestors. At Your Bidding They Are Uttered, and they are your very embodiment. You Are The Nectar of Immortality, O Imperishable, Eternal One. Truly, You Abide As The Transcendent Being,
ardhamatra sthitā nityā yānuccāryāviśeṣataḥ Tvam eva sā tvaṁ sāvitrī Tvaṁ devajananī parā
1.74 yet in every moment you abide, inseparable and inexpressible, as the eternal source of all becoming. Indeed You Are That. You Are Sāvitrī, the Source of All Purity and Protection; You Are the Supreme Mother of The Gods.
Tvayaitad dhāryate viśvaṁ tvayaitat sṛjyate jagat Tvayaitat pālyate Devi Tvam atsy ante ca sarvadā
1.75 By You is this universe supported, of You is this world born, by You is it protected, O Devī, and You always Consume it at the end.
visṛṣṭau sṛṣṭirūpā tvam sthitirūpā ca pālane tathā samhṛtirūpānte jagato ’sya jaganmaye
1.76 You Are the Creative Force at the World’s Birth and Its Sustenance for as long as it endures. So even at the end of this world, You Appear as Its Dissolution, You Who Encompass it all.
Mahāvidyā Mahāmāyā Mahāmedhā Mahāsmṛtiḥ Mahāmohā ca Bhavatī Mahādevī Mahāsurī
15
1.77 You Are The Great Knowledge and The Great Illusion, The Great Intelligence, The Great Memory and The Great Delusion, The Great Goddess and The Great Demoness.
prakṛtis Tvam ca Sarvasya Guṇatrayavibhāvinī Kālarātrir Mahārātrir Moharātriś ca dāruṇā
1.78 You Are Primordial Matter, Differentiating into the Threefold Qualities of Everything. You Are The Dark Night Of Periodic Dissolution, The Great Night of Final Dissolution, and The Terrifying Night Of Delusion.
Tvaṁ śrīs Tvam īśvari Tvaṁ hrīs Tvaṁ buddhir bodhalakṣaṇā Lajjā puṣṭis tathā tuṣṭis Tvaṁ śāntiḥ kṣāntir eva ca
1.79 You Are Radiant Splendor; You Reign Supreme Yet Are Unassuming; You Are The Light Of Understanding. Modesty Are You, And Prosperity, Contentment, Tranquillity and Forbearance.
khaḍginī śūlinī ghorā gadinī cakriṇī tathā śankhinl cāpinī bāṇabhuśuṇḍīparighāyudhā
1.80 Armed With Sword And Spear, And With Club And Discus, Waging War With Conch, Bow And Arrows, Sling And Iron Mace, You Inspire Dread.
saumyā saumyatarāśesasaumyebhyas tv Atisundarī parāparāṇāṁ Paramā Tvam Eva Parameśvarī
1.81 Yet, You Are Pleasing, More Pleasing Than All Else That Is Pleasing, and Exceedingly Beautiful. Transcending Both Highest and Lowest, You Are Indeed The Supreme Sovereign.
yac ca kiñcit kvacid vastu sadasadvākhilātmike tasya sarvasya yā śaktiḥ sā Tvaṁ kiṁ stūyase Mayā
1.82 Whatever exists, true or untrue, and wherever it may be, O Soul of Everything, You Are The Power Of All That. How can I praise You?
16
yayā Tvayā jagatsraṣṭā jagatpātātti yo jagat so ’pi nidrāvaśaṁ nītaḥ kastvāṁ stotum iheśvaraḥ
1.83 By You, even he Who Creates, Protects, and Devours the world is Subdued with Sleep. Who here can praise You?
viṣṇuḥ śarīragrahaṇam aham īśāna eva ca kāritāste yato ’tas Tvāṁ kaḥ stotum śaktimān bhavet
1.84 You have caused even Viṣṇu, Śiva, and Me to assume Our embodied forms. Who then can truly praise You?
sā Tvam ittham prabhāvaiḥ svair udārair Devi samstutā mohayaitau durādharṣāv asurau madhukaiṭabhau
1.85 Thus Extolled, O Devī, may You with Your Exalted Powers Confound Those Unassailable asuras, Madhu and Kaiṭabha.
prabodham ca jagatsvāmī nīyatām acyuto laghu
1.86 Let Viṣṇu, the lord of the world, be quickly awakened from his slumber
bodhaś ca kriyatāmasya hantum etau mahāsurau
1.87 and be roused to slay the two great asuras.’”
ṛṣir uvāca
1.88 The seer said:.’”
evaṁ stutā tadā Devī tāmasī tatra vedhasā viṣṇoḥ prabodhanārthāya nihantum madhukaitabhau
1.89 “Praised thus by the creator to rouse Viṣṇu into slaying Madhu and Kaiṭabha, then and there The Dark Goddess
17
netrāsyanāsikābāhuhṛdayebhyas tathorasaḥ nirgamya darśane tasthau brahmaṇo ’vyaktajanmanaḥ
1.90 Emerged from his eyes, mouth, nostrils, arms, heart, and chest, and appeared before Brahmā, Who is born from the Unmanifest.
uttasthau ca jagannāthas tayā mukto janārdanah ekārṇave ’hisayanāt tataḥ sa dadṛśe ca tau
1.91 And released by Her, Viṣṇu, the Lord of the world, arose from his serpent couch on the undifferentiated ocean and beheld
madhukaiṭabhau durātmānāv ativīryaparākramau krodharaktekṣaṇāv atturh brahmāṇaṁ janitodyamau
1.92 the evil-natured Madhu and Kaiṭabha, exceedingly strong and courageous, seeing red with anger and determined to devour Brahmā.
samutthāya tatas tābhyāṁ yuyudhe bhagavān hariḥ pancavarṣasahasrāṇi bāhupraharaṇo vibhuḥ
1.93 Then the blessed, all-pervading Viṣṇu rose up and fought with them in hand-to-hand combat for five thousand years.
tāv apyatibalonmattau mahāmāyāvimohitau
1.94 And they, mad with the arrogance of power and confounded By Mahāmāyā,
uktavantau varo ’smatto vriyatām iti keśavam
1.95 exclaimed to him, ‘Ask a boon from us! ’
śrī Bhagavān uvāca
1.96 The blessed lord Viṣṇu said:
18
bhavetām adya me tustau mama vadhyāv ubhāv api
1.97 ‘Since you are pleased with me, so be it. I will surely slay both of you now.
kim anyena vareṇātra etāvad dhi vṛtaṁ mama
1.98 What other boon is there to ask?”’
ṛṣir uvāca
1.99 The seer said:
vañcitābhyām iti tadā sarvam āpomayaṁ jagat vilokya tābhyāṁ gadito bhagavān kamalekṣaṇaḥ
1.100 “Thus deceived, and beholding that the world consisted entirely of water, they addressed the lotus-eyed Viṣṇu, saying:
āvāṁ jahi na yatrorvī salilena pariplutā
1.101 ‘Slay us where water does not flood the earth.’”
ṛṣir uvāca
1.102 The seer said:
tathety uktvā Bhagavatā śankhacakragadābhṛtā kṛtvā cakreṇa vai chinne jaghane śirasī tayoḥ
1.103 “‘So be it,’ said Viṣṇu, the wielder of conch, discus, and mace. Taking the two of them onto his lap, he cut off their heads with his discus.
Evam eṣā samutpannā Brahmaṇā saṁstutā svayam prabhāvam asyā Devyās tu bhūyah śṛṇu vadāmi te
19
1.104 Thus did The Devī Herself appear when praised by Brahmā. Hear still more of Her Glory, which I will tell you.”
20
Chapter 2: The Slaughter of Mahiṣāsura’s Armies
OṀ hṛīm ṛṣir uvāca
2.1 OṀ hrīṁ. The seer said:
devāsuram abhūd yuddhaṁ pūrṇam abdaśataṁ purā mahiṣe ‘surāṇām adhipe devānāṁ ca purandare
2.2 “Long ago, when Mahiṣa was chief of the asuras and Indra was chief of the gods, there was a war between their forces for a full hundred years.
tatrāsurair mahāvīryair devasainyaṁ parājitam jitvā ca sakalān devān indro ‘bhūn mahiṣāsuraḥ
2.3 The valorous asuras vanquished the army of the gods, and after all were conquered, Mahiṣa became the lord of heaven.
tataḥ parājitā devāḥ padmayoniṁ prajāpatim puraskṛtya gatās tatra yatreśagaruḍadhvajau
21
2.4 Then led by Brahmā, the lord of beings, the defeated gods went to Viṣṇu and Śiva
yathāvṛttaṁ tayos tadvan mahiṣāsuraceṣṭitam tridaśāḥ kathayāmāsur devābhibhavavistaram
2.5 and related in detail what had happened. The thirty gods told how Mahiṣāsura had wrought their defeat:
sūryendrāgnyanilendūnāṁ yamasya vanmasya ca anyeṣām cādhikārān sa svayam evādhitiṣṭhati
2.6 ‘He has usurped the authority of Sūrya, Indra, Agni, Vāyu, and Candra, and of Yama, Varuṇa, and all the others.
svargān nirākṛtāḥ sarve tena devagaṇā bhuvi vicaranti yathā martyā mahiseṇa durātmanā
2.7 Cast out from heaven by the evil Mahiṣa, all the multitudes of gods wander over the earth as mere mortals.
etad vaḥ kathitaṁ sarvam amarāriviceṣṭitam śaraṇaṁ vaḥ prapannāḥ smo vadhastasya vicintyatām
2.8 We have related all that this foe of the gods has done, and we seek refuge in You. Be pleased to devise a means for his destruction.’
itthaṁ niśamya devānāṁ vacāmsi madhusūdanaḥ cakāra kopāṁ śambhuś ca bhrukuṭīkuṭilānanau
2.9 When Viṣṇu and Śiva heard the entreaties of the gods, they knit their brows in fury and contorted their faces,
tato ‘tikopapūrṇasya cakriṇo vadanāt tataḥ niścakrāma mahat tejo brahmaṇaḥ śaṅkarasya ca
2.10 whereupon a great radiance came forth from Viṣṇu’s rage- filled countenance, and so, too, from Brahmā’s and Śiva’s.
22
anyeṣāṁ caiva devānāṁ śakrādīnāṁ śarīrataḥ nirgataṁ sumahat tejas tac caikyaṁ samagacchata
2.11 And from Indra’s body and from the bodies of all the other gods, a very great light issued, and it united and became one.
atīva tejasaḥ kūṭaṁ jvalantam iva parvatam dadṛśus te sūrās tatra jvālāvyāptadigantaram
2.12 The gods saw before them a peak of light like a mountain, blazing brightly and pervading the sky in every direction with its flames.
atulaṁ tatra tat tejaḥ sarvadevaśarīrajam ekasthaṁ tadabhūn nārī vyāptalokatrayaṁ tviṣā
2.13 Unequaled light, born from the bodies of all the gods, coalesced into a female form and pervaded the three worlds with its splendor.
yad abhūc chāmbhavaṁ tejas tenājāyata tan mukham yāmyena cābhavan keśā bāhavo viṣṇutejasā
2.14 From Śiva’s light came that which formed the Devī’s face. Yama’s radiance formed Her hair, and Viṣṇu’s effulgence became Her arms.
saumyena stanayor yugmaṁ madhyaṁ caindreṇa cābhavat vāruṇena ca jaṅghorū nitambas tejasā bhuvaḥ
2.15 The moon god’s soft light formed Her breasts, and Indra’s brilliance became Her waist. Varuṇa’s light became Her legs, and earth’s splendor formed Her hips.
brahmaṇas tejasā pādau tad aṅgulyo ‘rkatejasā vasūnāṁ ca karāṅgulyaḥ kaubereṇa ca nāsikā
2.16 Her feet took shape from Brahmā’s light and Her toes from Sürya’s brilliance. From the Vasus’ light Her fingers formed and from Kubera’s light, Her nose.
23
tasyāstu dantāḥ sambhūtāḥ prājāpatyena tejasā nayanatritayaṁ jajñe tathā pāvakatejasā
2.17 From Prajāpati’s lustre came Her teeth, and from Agni’s radiance Her three eyes were born.
bhruvau ca sandhyayos tejah śravaṇāv anilasya ca anyeṣāṁ caiva devānāṁ sambhavas tejasāṁ śivā
2.18 Dawn and dusk became Her eyebrows, the wind god’s splendor shaped Her ears, and all else born of the other gods’ light shone too as the auspicious Devī.
tataḥ samastadevānāṁ tejorāśisamudbhavām tāṁ vilokya mudaṁ prāpur amarā mahiṣārditāḥ
2.19 Then, beholding Her who appeared from out of their amassed light, all those gods, tormented by Mahiṣa, rejoiced.
tato devā dadus tasyai svāni svānyāyudhāni ca śūlam śūlād viniṣkṛṣya dadau tasyai pinākadhṛk
2.20 Then the gods bestowed on Her their own weapons and adornments. From his trident Śiva drew forth another and gave it to Her,
cakraṁ ca dattavān kṛṣṇaḥ samutpāṭya svacakrataḥ śaṅkhaṁ ca varuṇaḥ śaktiṁ dadau tasyai hutāśanaḥ
2.21 and Viṣṇu bestowed a discus spun out from his own. Varuṇa gave Her a conch; and Agni, the eater of oblations, gave Her a spear.
māruto dattavāṁś cāpaṁ bāṇapūrṇe tatheṣudhī vajram indraḥ samutpāṭya kuliśād amarādhipaḥ
2.22 Vāyu, the wind god, presented a bow and two quivers filled with arrows. Extracting a thunderbolt from his own, Indra, the lord of the immortals,
dadau tasyai sahasrākṣo ghaṇṭām airāvatād gājāt kāladaṇḍād yamo daṇḍaṁ pāśaṁ cāmbupatir dadau
24
2.23 the all-seeing one, gave it to Her along with a bell from his elephant Airāvata. From his staff of death Yama produced another staff, and Varuṇa, the lord of waters, gave a noose.
prajāpatiś cākṣamālāṁ dadau brahmā kamaṇḍalum samastaromakūpeṣu nijaraśmīn divākarah
2.24 Brahmā, the lord of beings, gave prayer beads and an ascetic’s waterpot. Sūrya, the bringer of day, bestowed his rays of sunlight on all the pores of Her skin;
kālaś ca dattavān khaḍgaṁ tasyāś carma ca nirmalam kṣīrodaś cāmalaṁ hāram ajare ca tathāmbare
2.25 and Kāla, the lord of time, presented a sword and shining shield. The ocean of milk bestowed a necklace of flawless pearls, ever-new garments,
cūḍāmaṇiṁ tathā divyaṁ kuṇḍale kaṭakāni ca ardhacandram tathā śubhraṁ keyūrān sarvabāhuṣu
2.26 a celestial crest-jewel, earrings, and bracelets, a radiant crescent-shaped ornament, armlets for all Her arms,
nūpurau vimalau tadvad graiveyakam anuttamam aṅgullyakaratnāni samastāsvangulīṣu ca
2.27 a pair of shining anklets, a necklace beyond compare, and bejeweled rings for all Her fingers.
viśvakarmā dadau tasyai paraśuṁ cātinirmalam astrāṇy anekarūpāṇi tathā ‘bhedyaṁ ca daṁśanam
2.28 Viśvakarman gave Her a gleaming ax, weapons of all kinds, and impenetrable armor.
amlānapankajāṁ mālāṁ śirasy urasi cāparām adadaj jaladhis tasyai pankajaṁ cātiśobhanam
25
2.29 Garlands of unfading lotuses for Her head and breast the ocean gave to Her, and yet another magnificent lotus to grace Her hand.
himavān vāhanam siṁhaṁ ratnāni vividhāni ca dadāv asūnyaṁ surayā pānapātraṁ dhanādhipaḥ
2.30 Himālaya, the lord of mountains, gave Her a lion to ride upon and jewels of many kinds; and Kubera, the lord of wealth, presented a drinking vessel ever-brimming with wine.
śeṣaś ca sarvanāgeśo mahāmaṇivibhūṣitam nāgahāraṁ dadau tasyai dhatte yaḥ pṛthivīmimām
2.31 Śeṣa, the lord of serpents, who supports this earth, gave Her a garland of snakes, adorned with precious gems.
anyair api surair devī bhūsaṇair āyudhais tathā sammānitā nanādoccaiḥ sāṭṭahāsaṁ muhur muhuḥ
2.32 Honored also by the other gods with adornments and weapons, the Devī laughed thunderously and defiantly again and again.
tasyā nādena ghoreṇa kṛtsnam āpūritaṁ nabhaḥ amāyatātimahatā pratiśabdo mahānabhūt
2.33 She filled the entire sky with Her terrible roar, and from the immeasurable din a great echo resounded.
cukṣubhuh sakala lokāḥ samudraś ca cakampire cacāla vasudhā celuḥ sakalāś ca mahldharāḥ
2.34 All the worlds shook, and the oceans churned. The earth quaked, and the mountains heaved.
jayeti devās ca mudā tām ūcuḥ simhavāhinīm tuṣṭuvur munayaś caināṁ bhaktinamrātmamūrtayaḥ
26
2.35 In joy the gods exclaimed, ‘Victory! ’ to the lion-mounted Devī; and with bodies bowed in devotion, the sages praised Her.
dṛṣṭvā samastaṁ saṁkṣubdhaṁ trailokyam amarārayaḥ sannaddhākhilasainyāste samuttasthur udāyudhāḥ
2.36 When the enemies of the gods saw the three worlds in upheaval, they readied all their forces for battle and rose up as one, with weapons held high.
āḥ kim etad iti krodhād ābhāṣya mahiṣāsuraḥ abhyadhāvata taṁ śabdam aśeṣair asurair vṛtaḥ
2.37 ‘Aha! What is this?’ Mahiṣāsura bellowed in wrath. Surrounded by countless asuras, he rushed toward the sound
sa dadarśa tato devīṁ vyāptalokatrayāṁ tviṣā pādākrāntyā natabhuvaṁ kirīṭollikhitāmbarām
2.38 and then beheld the Devī, who pervaded the three worlds with Her radiance, bending the earth under Her tread, scraping the sky with Her diadem,
kṣobhitāśeṣapātālāṁ dhanurjyāniḥsvanena tām diśo bhujasahasreṇa samantād vyāpya samsthitām
2.39 shaking all the nether regions with the resonance of Her bowstring, and standing there, penetrating every direction with Her thousand arms.
tataḥ pravavṛte yuddhaṁ tayā devyā suradviṣām śastrāstrair bahudhā muktair ādīpitadigantaram
2.40 Thereupon, the battle began between the Devī and the enemies of the gods. Swords and missiles, hurled in every direction, lit up the quarters of the sky.
mahiṣāsurasenānīś cikṣurākhyo mahāsurah yuyudhe cāmaraś cānyaiś caturangabalānvitaḥ
2.41 Mahiṣāsura’s general, the great asura named Cikṣura, battled there, and Cāmara led cavalry, charioteers, elephant-drivers, and foot soldiers.
27
rathānāmayutaiḥ ṣaḍbhir udagrākhyo mahāsuraḥ ayudhyatāyutānāṁ ca sahasreṇa mahāhanuḥ
2.42 The great asura called Udagra commanded sixty thousand chariots, Mahāhanu gave battle with his ten million,
pañcāśadbhiś ca niyutair asilomā mahāsuraḥ ayutānāṁ śataiḥ ṣaḍbhir bāṣkalo yuyudhe raṇe
2.43 and the mighty Asiloman fought with forces fifty million strong. With sixty million Bāṣkala fought in the conflict.
gajavājisahasraughair anekaiḥ parivāritaḥ vṛto rathānāṁ koṭyā ca yuddhe tasminn ayudhyata
2.44 Encircled by streaming multitudes of elephants and horses, Parivārita fought in that battle with ten million chariots,
biḍālākhyo ‘yutānāṁ ca pañcāśadbhir athāyutaiḥ yuyudhe saṁyuge tatra rathānāṁ parivāritaḥ
2.45 and he who is called Biḍāla, with five billion chariots surrounding him, engaged in combat there.
anye ca tatrāyutaso rathanāgahayair vṛtāḥ yuyudhuḥ samyuge devyā saha tatra mahāsurāḥ
2.46 Amid chariots, elephants, and horses, myriads of other great asuras battled with the Devī,
koṭikoṭisahasrais tu rathānām dantināṁ tathā hayānāṁ ca vṛto yuddhe tatrābhūn mahiṣāsuraḥ
2.47 their countless chariots, elephants, and horses surrounding Māhiṣāsura there in the fray.
28
tomarair bhindipālaiś ca śaktibhir musalais tathā yuyudhuḥ samyuge devyā khaḍgaiḥ paraśupaṭṭiśaiḥ
2.48 With lances and javelins, spears and clubs, swords and axes, and sharp-edged spears, they fought with the Devī.
kecic ca cikṣipuḥ śaktīḥ kecit pāśāṁs tathāpare Devīṁ khaḍgaprahārais tu te tāṁ hantuṁ pracakramuḥ
2.49 Some hurled spears while others threw nooses; intent on killing Her, they began an assault with their swords.
sāpi Devī tatas tāni śastrāṇy astrāṇi Caṇḍikā lllayaiva praciccheda nijaśastrāstravarṣiṇī
2.50 But She, the Devī Caṇḍikā, showered down all manner of weapons and cut through their armaments as if in play.
anāyastānanā Devī stūyamānā surarṣibhiḥ mumocāsuradeheṣu śastrāṇyastrāṇi ceśvarī
2.51 Praised by gods and seers, She remained serene, even while unleashing Her weapons at the asuras’ bodies.
so ‘pi kruddho dhutasaṭo Devyā vāhanakesarī cacārāsurasainyeṣu vanesv iva hutāśanaḥ
2.52 Her lion-mount, shaking its mane in fury, stalked among the demon throngs as fire rages through a Forest.
niḥśvāsān mumuce yāṁś ca yudhyamānā raṇe ‘mbikā ta eva sadyaḥ sambhūtā gaṇāḥ śatasahasraśaḥ
2.53 The sighs that Ambikā heaved while fighting became at once Her legions by the hundreds and thousands.
29
yuyudhus te paraśubhir bhindipālāsipaṭṭiśaiḥ nāsayanto ‘suragaṇān Devīsaktyupabṛmhitāḥ
2.54 They fought with axes, javelins, swords, and sharp- edged spears, and drawing strength from Her power, they destroyed the demon hordes.
avādayanta paṭahān gaṇāḥ śankhāms tathāpare mṛdaṅgāṁś ca tathaivānye tasmin yuddhamahotsave
2.55 Some of Her throngs beat war drums resoundingly, some blew conches, and others drummed upon tabors in their zest for battle.
tato Devī triśūlena gadayā śaktivṛṣṭibhiḥ khaḍgādibhiś ca śataśo nijaghāna mahāsurān
2.56 Then the Devī, with Her trident, club, and volleys of spears, with Her swords and other weapons, slew great asuras by the hundreds
pātayāmāsa caivānyān ghaṇṭāsvanavimohitān asurān bhuvi pāśena baddhvā cānyān akarṣayat
2.57 and brought down still more with the confounding din of Her bell. Binding other asuras with Her noose, She dragged them along the ground.
kecid dvidhākṛtās tīkṣṇaiḥ khaḍgapātais tathāpare vipothitā nipātena gadayā bhuvi serate
2.58 Her swordstrokes slashed others in two, while crushing blows from Her mace brought still more down,
vemuś ca kecid rudhiraṁ musalena bhṛśaṁ hatāḥ kecin nipatitā bhūmau bhinnāḥ śūlena vakṣasi
2.59 and those bludgeoned by Her club vomited forth blood. Others fell to the ground, pierced through the chest by Her trident.
nirantarāḥ śaraugheṇa kṛtāḥ kecid raṇājire śalyānukāriṇaḥ prāṇān mumucus tridaśārdanāḥ
30
2.60 Her steady stream of arrows made some on that battlefield resemble bristling porcupines, and those tormenters of the gods breathed their last.
keṣāñcid bāhavaś chinnāś chinnagrīvās tathāpare śirāmsi petur anyeṣām anye madhye vidāritāḥ
2.61 Some had their arms severed, others their necks broken. The heads of others rolled, and still others had their bodies ripped apart.
vicchinnajanghās tv apare petur urvyāṁ mahāsurāḥ ekabāhvakṣicaraṇāḥ kecid Devyā dvidhākṛtāḥ
2.62 Great asuras, their legs cut from under them, toppled to the ground. Some, severed lengthwise by the Devī, were left one-armed, one-eyed, one-legged.
chinne ‘pi cānye śirasi patitāḥ punar utthitāḥ nanṛtuś cāpare tatra yuddhe tūryalayāśritāḥ
2.63 While others there in the battle danced to the throbbing drums, those that She decapitated fell and rose again,
kabandhāś chinnaśirasaḥ khadgaśaktyṛṣṭipāṇayaḥ tiṣṭha tiṣṭheti bhāṣanto Devīm anye mahāsurāḥ
2.64 headless bodies, still grasping swords, spears, and lances in hand. ‘Stop! Stop!’ other great asuras cried out to the Devī.
pātitai rathanāgāśvair asuraiś ca vasundharā agamyā sābhavat tatra yatrābhūt sa mahāraṇaḥ
2.65 Where that great battle raged, the earth was impassable with fallen chariots, elephants, horses, and corpses.
śoṇitaughā mahānadyaḥ sadyas tatra visusruvuḥ madhye cāsurasainyasya vāraṇāsuravājinām
2.66 Torrents of blood, like mighty rivers, gushed from elephants, asuras, and horses there in the midst of the demon army.
31
ksaṇena tan mahāsainyam asurāṇām tathāmbikā ninye kṣayaṁ yathā vahnisṭṛṇadārumahācayam
2.67 In an instant, Ambikā led that vast legion of foes to its destruction, as quickly as fire consumes a heap of straw and wood.
sa ca simho mahānādam utsṛjan dhutakesaraḥ sarīrebhyo ‘marārīṇām asūn iva vicinvati
2.68 And Her lion, roaring thunderously and shaking its mane, prowled about in search of life- breath still issuing from the enemies’ bodies.
Devyā gaṇaiś ca tais tatra kṛtaṁ yuddhaṁ tathāsuraiḥ yathaiṣāṁ tuṣṭuvur devāḥ puspavṛṣṭimuco divi
2.69 So did the Devī’s hosts wage war against the asuras. So also did the gods in heaven shower down flowers in praise.”
32
Chapter 3: The Slaying of Mahiṣāsura
ṛṣir uvāca
3.1 The seer said:
nihanyamānaṁ tat sainyam avalokya mahāsuraḥ senānīś cikṣuraḥ kopād yayau yoddhum athāmbikām
3.2 “Now when he saw the army being slaughtered, Cikṣura, the great asura general, went forth in fury to battle with Ambikā.
Sa Devīṁ śaravarṣeṇa vavarṣa 32amara ‘suraḥ yathā merugireḥ śṛṅgaṁ toyavarṣeṇa toyadaḥ
3.3 He rained showers of arrows on the Devī in the combat, just as a raincloud showers the summit of Mount Meru.
33
Tasya chitvā tato Devī līlayaiva śarotkarān jaghāna turagān bāṇair yantāraṁ caiva vājinām
3.4 But easily shattering his volley, the Devī killed his steeds and charioteer with Her arrows.
Ciccheda ca dhanuḥ sadyo dhvajaṁ cātisamucchritam vivyādha caiva gātreṣu chinnadhanvānam āśugaiḥ
3.5 Like lightning, She slashed through his bow and highflying banner. Having destroyed his bow, She wounded him in the limbs with Her swift arrows.
Sa chinnadhanvā viratho hatāśvo hatasārathiḥ abhyadhāvata tāṁ Devīṁ khaḍgacarmadharo ‘suraḥ
3.6 With bow broken, chariot wrecked, and horses and charioteer slain, the asura, armed with sword and shield, rushed at the Devī.
Siṁham āhatya khaḍgena tīkṣṇadhāreṇa mūrdhani ājaghāna bhuje savye Devīm apyativegavān
3.7 First striking Her lion on the head with his sharp-edged sword, he violently struck the Devī’s left arm.
Tasyāḥ khadgo bhujaṁ prāpya paphāla nṛpanandana tato jagrāha śūlaṁ sa kopād aruṇalocanaḥ
3.8 O king, as soon as the sword touched Her, it shattered. Then, the great asura, his eyes red with rage, seized his blazing lance
cikṣepa ca tatas tat tu bhadrakālyāṁ mahāsuraḥ jājvalyamānaṁ tejobhī ravibimbam ivāmbarāt
3.9 and flung it at Bhadrakālī, as though he were hurling the very sun from the sky.
Dṛṣṭvā tad āpatac chūlaṁ Devī śūlam amuñcata tac chūlaṁ śatadhā tena nītaṁ sa ca mahāsuraḥ
34
3.10 Seeing it approach, the Devī released Her lance and shattered the great asura and his weapon into a hundred pieces.
Hate tasmin mahāvīrye mahiṣasya camūpatau ājagāma gajārūḍhaś cāmaras tridaśārdanaḥ
3.11 When Mahiṣa’s mighty general lay slain, Cāmara, the afflictor of the gods, advanced, mounted on an elephant.
So ‘pi śaktiṁ mumocātha devyās tām ambikā drutam hunkārābhihatāṁ bhūmau pātayāmāsa niṣprabhām
3.12 He dispatched his spear toward the Devī. Quickly Ambikā’s contemptuous outcry sent it hurtling powerless to the ground.
Bhagnāṁ śaktiṁ nipatitāṁ dṛṣṭvā krodhasamanvitaḥ cikṣepa cāmaraḥ śūlaṁ bāṇais tad api sācchinat
3.13 Seeing it fallen and shattered, the enraged Cāmara flung a lance, and that, too, She destroyed with Her arrows.
Tataḥ siṁhaḥ samutpatya gajakumbhāntarasthitaḥ bāhuyuddhena yuyudhe tenocchais tridaśāriṇā
3.14 Her lion then leapt up and, astride the elephant’s forehead, engaged fiercely in direct combat with the enemy of the gods.
Yudhyamānau tatas tau tu tasmān nāgān mahīṁ gatau yuyudhāte ‘tisaṁrabdhau prahārair atidāruṇaiḥ
3.15 Struggling, the two fell from the elephant to the ground, still locked in dreadful combat.
Tato vegāt kham utpatya nipatya ca mṛgāriṇā karaprahāreṇa śiraś cāmarasya pṛthak kṛtam
3.16 In a flash the lion sprang skyward, then alighted and severed Cāmara’s head with a single blow of its paw.
35
Udagraś ca raṇe Devyā śilāvṛkṣādibhir hataḥ dantamuṣṭitalaiś caiva karālaś ca nipātitaḥ
3.17 In the fighting the Devī assailed the asura Udagra with rocks and trees; and biting, punching, and slapping Karāla, She felled him, too.
Devī kruddhā gadāpātaiś cūrṇayāmāsa coddhatam bāṣkalaṁ bhindipālena bāṇais tāmraṁ tathāndhakam
3.18 Enraged, the Devī crushed Uddhata to a pulp with the blows of Her mace. She killed Bāṣkala with Her javelin and Tāmra and Andhaka with Her arrows,
ugrāsyam ugravīryaṁ ca tathaiva ca mahāhanum trinetrā ca triśūlena jaghāna parameśvarī
3.19 and with Her trident the supreme three-eyed Goddess slew Ugrāsya, Ugravīrya, and also Mahāhanu.
Biḍālasyāsinā kāyāt pātayāmāsa vai śiraḥ durdharaṁ durmukhaṁ cobhau śarair ninye yamakṣayam
3.20 With Her sword She struck Biḍāla’s head from his body, and with Her arrows She dispatched both Durdhara and Durmukha to the abode of death.
Evaṁ samkṣīyamāṇe tu svasainye mahiṣāsuraḥ māhiṣeṇa svarūpeṇa trāsayāmāsa tān gaṇān
3.21 While his army thus met destruction, Mahiṣāsura terrified the Devī’s hosts with his own buffalo form,
kāṁścit tuṇḍaprahāreṇa khurakṣepais tathāparān lāṅgūlatāḍitāṁś cānyān śṛngābhyāṁ ca vidāritān
3.22 jostling some with his snout and pawing others with his hooves. Others he lashed with his tail and lacerated with his horns.
36
Vegena kāṁścid aparān nādena bhramaṇena ca niḥśvāsapavanenānyān pātayāmāsa bhūtale
3.23 He toppled some of them to the ground with the unleashed force of his bellowing and wheeling about, and the blast of his breath brought still others down.
Nipātya pramathānīkam abhyadhāvata so ‘suraḥ siṁhaṁ hantuṁ mahādevyāḥ kopaṁ cakre tato ‘mbikā
3.24 After destroying the great Goddess’s forces, Mahiṣāsura rushed forward to slay Her lion. At that, Ambikā became enraged.
So ‘pi kopān mahāvīryaḥ khurakṣuṇṇamahītalaḥ śṛṅgābhyāṁ parvatān uccāṁś cikṣepa ca nanāda ca
3.25 But Mahiṣāsura, great in valor, struck the earth angrily with his hooves, flung mountains skyward with his horns, and bellowed frightfully.
Vegabhramaṇavikṣuṇṇā mahī tasya vyaśīryata lāngūlenāhataś cābdhiḥ plāvayāmāsa sarvataḥ
3.26 Under his frenzied wheeling, the trampled earth broke apart. Lashed by his tail, the ocean overflowed all around.
Dhutaśṛṅgavibhinnāś ca khaṇḍaṁ khaṇḍarh yayur ghanāḥ śvāsānilāstāḥ śataśo nipetur nabhaso ‘calāḥ
3.27 Thrashed by his horns, the clouds fragmented and dispersed. Tossed about on his blasting breath, mountains by the hundreds fell from the sky.
Iti krodhasamādhmātam āpatantaṁ mahāsuram dṛṣṭvā sā Caṇḍikā kopāṁ tad vadhāya tadākarot
3.28 When She saw the great asura approaching, inflated with rage, Caṇḍikā aroused Her wrath and prepared to slay him.
Sā ksiptvā tasya vai pāśaṁ taṁ babandha mahāsuraṁ tatyāja māhiṣaṁ rūpaṁ so ‘pi baddho mahāmṛdhe
37
3.29 She threw Her noose over him and bound him. Fettered thus in the fierce battle, the great asura left his buffalo form
tataḥ siṁho ‘bhavat sadyo yāvat tasyāmbikā śiraḥ chinatti tāvat puruṣaḥ khadgapāṇir adṛśyata
3.30 and assumed the shape of a lion. No sooner had Ambikā severed his head than he appeared as a man with sword in hand.
Tata evāśu puruṣaṁ Devī ciccheda sāyakaiḥ taṁ khaḍgacarmaṇā sārdhaṁ tataḥ so ‘bhūn mahāgajaḥ
3.31 Instantly, with Her arrows the Devī cut him to shreds along with his sword and shield. Then he took the form of a great elephant
kareṇa ca mahāsiṁhaṁ taṁ cakarṣa jagarja ca karṣatas tu karaṁ Devī khaḍgena nirakṛntata
3.32 and dragged Her mighty lion along with his trunk, but while he trumpeted loudly, the Devī chopped off his trunk with Her sword.
Tato mahāsuro bhūyo māhiṣaṁ vapurāsthitaḥ tathaiva kṣobhayāmāsa trailokyaṁ sacarācaram
3.33 Once more the great asura assumed his buffalo form and caused the three worlds, with all that is moving and unmoving, to tremble.
Tataḥ kruddhā jaganmātā Caṇḍikā pānam uttamam papau punaḥ punaś caiva jahāsāruṇalocanā
3.34 Angered, Caṇḍikā, the Mother of the worlds, drank a divine potion, and with eyes reddened She laughed again and again.
Nanarda cāsuraḥ so ‘pi balavīryamadoddhataḥ viṣāṇābhyāṁ ca cikṣepa Caṇḍikāṁ prati bhūdharān
3.35 The asura bellowed in return, intoxicated with his own might and valor, and with his horns he hurled mountains at Caṇḍikā.
38
Sā ca tān prahitāṁs tena cūrṇayantī śarotkaraiḥ uvāca taṁ madoddhūtamukharāgākulākṣaram
3.36 Her volley of arrows reduced them to dust. Her face flushed with inebriation from the divine drink, and She addressed him excitedly.
Devy uvāca
3.37 The Devī said:
garja garja kṣaṇaṁ mūḍha madhu yāvat pibāmy aham mayā tvayi hate ‘traiva garjiṣyanty āśu devatāḥ
3.38 ‘Bellow, you fool, bellow for now while I drink this potion. After I have slain you, the gods will cheer in this very place.”’
Ṛṣir uvāca
3.39 The seer said:
evam uktvā samutpatya sārūḍhā taṁ mahāsuram pādenākramya kaṇṭhe ca śulenainam atāḍayat
3.40 “Having declared that, She leapt upon the great asura, pinned his neck down with Her foot, and pierced him through with Her spear.
Tataḥ so ‘pi padākrāntas tayā nijamukhāt tataḥ ardhaniṣkrānta evāsīd Devyā vīryeṇa saṁvṛtaḥ
3.41 Trapped there under the Devī’s foot and crushed by Her might, he emerged half-way in his true form from his buffalo mouth.
Ardhaniṣkrānta evāsau yudhyamāno mahāsuraḥ tayā mahāsinā Devyā śiraśchittvā nipātitaḥ
39
3.42 Half-revealed and fighting still, that great asura fell to the Devī, beheaded by Her great sword.
Tato hāhākṛtaṁ sarvaṁ daityasainyaṁ nanāśa tat praharṣaṁ ca paraṁ jagmuḥ sakalā devatāgaṇāḥ
3.43 Then crying out in alarm, the whole demon army perished, and all the divine hosts exulted.
Tuṣṭuvus tāṁ surā Devīṁ saha divyair maharṣibhiḥ jagur gandharvapatayo nanṛtuś cāpsarogaṇāḥ
3.44 Together with the great heavenly seers the gods praised the Devī, the celestial musicians sang, and throngs of cloud-nymphs danced.”
40
Chapter 4: Praise by Indra and the Other Gods
ṛṣir uvāca
4.1 The seer said:
śakrādayaḥ suragaṇā nihate ’tivīrye tasmin durātmani surāribale ca Devyā tāṁ tuṣṭuvuḥ praṇatinamraśirodharāṁsā vāgbhiḥ praharṣapulakodgamacārudehāḥ
4.2 “When the Devī had struck down the brave but wicked Mahiṣāsura and his army of the Gods’ foes, Indra and the hosts of Gods lifted their voices to Her in praise, their heads bowed in reverence, their bodies made beautiful by the thrill of rapture.
Devyā yayā tatam idaṁ jagad ātmaśaktyā niḥśeṣadevagaṇaśaktisamūhamūrtyā tāṁ Ambikām akhiladevamaharṣipūjyāṁ bhaktyā natāḥ sma vidadhātu śubhāni sā naḥ
4.3 ‘To the Devī, Who spreads out this world through Her own power and Who embodies Herself as all the powers of the hosts of Gods; to Ambikā, Who is worthy of
41
worship by all the Gods and great seers, we bow down in devotion. May She grant us that which is auspicious.
yasyāḥ prabhāvam atulaṁ bhagavān ananto brahmā haraś ca na hi vaktum alaṁ balaṁ ca sā caṇḍikākhilajagat paripālanāya nāśāya cāśubhabhayasya matiṁ karotu
4.4 May She whose unequalled might and splendor even the blessed Viṣṇu, Brahmā, and Śiva are powerless to describe, may She, Caṇḍikā, be intent on protecting all the world and on destroying the fear of misfortune.
yā śrīḥ svayaṁ sukṛtināṁ bhavaneṣvalakṣmīḥ pāpātmanāṁ kṛtadhiyāṁ hṛdayeṣu buddhiḥ śraddhā satāṁ kulajanaprabhavasya lajjā tāṁ tvāṁ natāḥ sma paripālaya Devi viśvam
4.5 O Devī, we bow before You Who are yourself good fortune in the dwellings of the virtuous and misfortune in the abodes of the wicked, intelligence in the hearts of the learned, faith in the hearts of the good, and modesty in the hearts of the high-born. May You protect the universe!
kiṁ varṇayāma tava rūpam acintyam etat kiñ cātivīryam asurakṣayakāri bhūri kiṁ cāhaveṣu caritāni tavāti yāni sarveṣu Devy asuradevagaṇādikeṣu
4.6 How can we describe this form of yours, which surpasses thought? And Your abundant, exceeding valor that destroys evil? And Your deeds in battle, O Devī, among all the throngs of Gods and demons?
hetuḥ samastajagatāṁ triguṇāpi doṣair na jñāyase hariharādibhir apyapārā sarvāśrayākhilam idam jagad amśabhūtam avyākṛtā hi paramā prakṛtis tvam ādyā
4.7 You are the cause of all the worlds. Though containing the triple forces of
42
creation within yourself, You are untouched by any imperfection. You are unfathomable even to Viṣṇu, Śiva, and the other Gods. You are the resort of all. You are this entire, manifold world and You are primordial matter, supreme and untransformed.
yasyāḥ samastasuratā samudīraṇena tṛptiṁ prayāti sakaleṣu makheṣu Devi svāhāsi vai pitṛgaṇasya ca tṛptihetur uccāryase tvam ata eva janaiḥ svadhā ca
4.8 O Devī, You are the mantra of consecration whose utterance in all sacrifices brings satisfaction to the whole assemblage of Gods, and You are the mantra which humans proclaim as the cause of satisfaction to the hosts of ancestral spirits.
yā muktihetur avicintyamahāvratā tvaṁ abhyasyase suniyatendriyatattvasāraiḥ mokṣārthibhir munibhir astasamastadoṣair vidyāsi sā bhagavatī paramā hi Devi
4.9 O Devī, Who are the cause of liberation and great, inconceivable austerities: sages yearning for liberation contemplate You with senses restrained, intent upon truth, with all faults cast off, for You are the blessed, supreme knowledge.
śabdātmikā suvimalargyajuṣām nidhānam udgītharamyapadapāṭhavatāṁ ca sāmnām Devī trayī Bhagavatī bhavabhāvanāya vārtā ca sarvajagatāṁ paramārtihantrī
4.10 With sound as Your essence, You are the treasury that holds the taintless Vedic hymns, sung to resound joyfully with Your holy name. You are the blessed Devī, Who embodies the three Vedas. Intent on conferring well-being, You are the supreme destroyer of pain in all the worlds.
medhāsi Devi viditākhilaśāstrasārā Durgāsi durgabhavasāgaranaur asaṅgā śrīḥ kaiṭabhārihṛdayaikakṛtādhivāsā Gaurī tvaṁ eva śaśimaulikṛtapratiṣṭhā
43
4.11 O Devī, You are the intelligence by which the essence of all scriptures is understood. You are Durgā, the vessel free of attachments that takes one across life’s difficult ocean. You are Srī, the radiant splendor that abides in the heart of Viṣṇu. You are Gaurī, the shining goddess Who abides with the moon-crowned Śiva.
īṣatsahāsam amalaṁ paripūrṇacandra- bimbānukāri kanakottamakāntikāntam atyadbhutaṁ prahṛtam āttaruṣā tathāpi vaktraṁ vilokya sahasā mahiṣāsureṇa
4.12 Gently smiling, Your shining face resembles the full moon’s orb and is as pleasing as the lustre of the finest gold. Beholding It, how could Mahiṣāsura, even though enraged, be moved to strike it?
dṛṣṭvā tu Devi kupitaṁ bhrukuṭīkarālam udyacchaśāṅkasadṛśacchavi yan na sadyaḥ prāṇān mumoca mahiṣas tad atīva citraṁ kair jīvyate hi kupitāntakadarśanena
4.13 Still stranger was it, O Devī, that Mahiṣa did not perish the instant he beheld Your wrathful face, reddened like the rising moon and scowling frightfully. For who can behold the enraged face of death and still live?
Devi prasīda paramā bhavatī bhavāya sadyo vināśayasi kopavatī kulāni vijñātam etad adhunaiva yad astam etan nītaṁ balaṁ suvipulaṁ mahiṣāsurasya 
4.14 O Devī, Who are supreme, be gracious to all creation, for when angered You can annihilate multitudes. We saw this the moment You brought Mahiṣāsura’s vast power to an end.
te sammatā janapadeṣu dhanāni teṣāṁ teṣāṁ yaśāṁsi na ca sīdati dharmavargaḥ dhanyāsta eva nibhṛtatmajabhṛtyadārā yeṣāṁ sadābhyudayadā bhavatī prasannā
4.15 Those to whom You are bounteous are honored among peoples, theirs are riches, theirs are glories, and their righteous acts know no limit. They indeed are blessed with devoted children, attendants, and wives.
44
dharmyāṇi Devi sakalāni sadaiva karmāṇy atyādṛtaḥ pratidinaṁ sukṛtī karoti svargaṁ prayāti ca tato bhavatlī prasādāl- lokatraye ’pi phaladā nanu Devi tena
4.16 One who is virtuous and ever mindful performs daily all righteous deeds, O Devī, and by Your grace attains to heaven. Are You not, then, the giver of rewards in all the three worlds?
Durge smṛtā harasi bhītim aśeṣajantoḥ svasthaiḥ smṛtā matim atīva śubhāṁ dadāsi dāridryaduḥkhabhayahāriṇi kā tvad anyā sarvopakārakaraṇāya sadārdracittā
4.17 Remembered in distress, You remove fear from every creature. Remembered by the untroubled, You confer even greater serenity of mind. Dispeller of poverty, suffering, and fear, Who other than You is ever intent on benevolence toward all?
ebhir hatair jagad upaiti sukhaṁ tathaite kurvantu nāma narakāya cirāya pāpam samgrāma mṛtyum adhigamya divaṁ prayāntu matveti nūnam ahitān vinihaṁsi Devi
4.18 The world attains happiness when You slay its foes, and though they may have committed enough evil to keep them long in torment, even as You strike down our enemies, O Devī, You think, May they reach heaven through death in battle with Me.
dṛṣṭvaiva kiṁ na bhavatī prakaroti bhasma sarvāsurān ariṣu yat prahiṇoṣi śastram lokān prayāntu ripavo ’pi hi śastrapūtā itthaṁ matir bhavati teṣv api te ’tisādhvī
4.19 Why does Your mere glance not reduce all asuras to ashes? Because when assailed by Your weapons and thus purified, even those adversaries may attain the higher worlds.
khaḍgaprabhānikaravisphuraṇais tathograiḥ śūlāgrakāntinivahena dṛśo ’surāṇām
45
yan nāgatā vilayam aṁśumad indukhaṇḍa yogyānanam tava vilokayatāṁ tad etat
4.20 If the intense light flashing frightfully from Your sword or the glaring brilliance of Your spearpoint did not blind the asuras’ eyes, it was because You made them behold the moonlike radiance beaming from Your face.
durvṛttavṛttaśamanaṁ tava Devi śīlaṁ rūpaṁ tathaitad avicintyam atulyam anyaiḥ vīryaṁ ca hantṛ hṛtadevaparākramāṇāṁ vairiṣv api prakṭitaiva dayā tvayettham
4.21 Even toward them Your intentions are most gracious. O Devī, Your nature is to subdue the misconduct of the wicked. Others cannot equal Your inconceivable grace, for even while Your might destroys those Who have wrested power from the Gods, You show compassion toward those very foes.
kenopamā bhavatu te ’sya parākramasya rūpaṁ ca śatrubhayakāry atihāri kutra citte kṛpā samaraniṣṭhuratā ca dṛṣṭā tvayy eva Devi varade bhuvanatraye ’pi
4.22 To what may Your prowess be compared? Where else is there beauty so ravishing, yet striking fear into enemies? Where in the three worlds are compassion in heart and resolve in battle seen as they are in You, O beneficent Devī?
trailokyam etad akhilaṁ ripunāśanena trātam tvayā samaramūrdhani te ’pi hatvā nītā divaṁ ripugaṇā bhayam apy apāstam asmākam unmada surāribhavam namaste
4.23 Destroying all foes, You have saved the three worlds. Slaying them at the battle-front, You led even those frenzied, hostile throngs to heaven, even while dispelling our fear of them. Salutations to You!
śūlena pāhi no Devi pāhi khaḍgena cāmbike ghaṇṭāsvanena naḥ pāhi cāpajyānissvanena ca
4.24 Protect us with Your spear, O Devī, and protect us with Your sword, O Ambikā. Protect us with the clangor of Your bell and the resonance of Your bowstring.
46
prācyāṁ rakṣa pratīcyāṁ ca caṇḍike rakṣa dakṣine bhrāmaṇenātmaśūlasya uttarasyāṁ tatheśvari
4.25 Guard us in the east and in the west, O Caṇḍikā. Guard us in the south and also in the north, O Īśvarī, by brandishing Your spear.
saumyāni yāni rūpāṇi trailokye vicaranti te yāni cātyantaghorāṇi tai rakṣāsmāṁs tathā bhuvam
4.26 With Your gentle forms that move through the three worlds and with Your surpassingly terrible ones, protect us and also the earth.
khaḍgaśūlagadādīni yāni cāstrāṇi te ’mbike karapallavasaṅgīni tair asmān rakṣa sarvataḥ
4.27 O Ambikā, with sword, spear, mace, and whatever other weapons Your tender hands have touched, protect us on all sides.’”
ṛṣir uvāca 
4.28 The seer said:
evaṁ stutā surair divyaiḥ kusumair nandanodbhavaiḥ arcitā jagatām dhātrī tathā gandhānulepanaiḥ
4.29 “In that way the Gods praised Her Who supports the worlds, honoring Her with flowers that bloom in Indra’s paradise and anointing Her with perfumes.
bhaktyā samastais tridaśair divyair dhūpaiḥ sudhūpitā prāha prasādasumukhī samastān praṇatān surān
4.30 Devotedly the assembled Gods offered heavenly incense to Her. Serene of countenance, She spoke to all the Gods, who were bowed down in reverence.
Devy uvāca 
4.31 The Devī said:
47
vriyatām tridaśāḥ sarve yad asmatto ’bhivāñchitam dadāmy aham atiprītyā stavair ebhiḥ supūjitā
4.32 ‘All You Gods, ask whatever You wish of Me. Well pleased with Your hymns, I will gladly grant it.’
Devā ūcuḥ
4.33 The Gods said:
Bhagavatyā kṛtaṁ sarvaṁ na kiñcid avasiṣyate yad ayaṁ nihataḥ śatrur asmākam mahiṣāsuraḥ
4.34 ‘Since You, the glorious one, have slain our enemy, this Mahiṣāsura, all has been accomplished; nothing remains to be done.
yadi cāpi varo deyas tvayā ’smākaṁ Maheśvari saṁsmṛtā saṁsmṛtā tvaṁ no himsethāḥ paramāpadaḥ
4.35 But if You are to grant a blessing, O great sovereign, may You destroy our direst misfortunes whenever we remember You.
yaś ca martyaḥ stavair ebhis tvāṁ stoṣyaty amalānane tasya vittarddhivibhavair dhanadārādisampadām
4.36 O You of spotless countenance, may You bring increased wealth, family, and success to whatever mortal shall praise You with these hymns.
vṛddhaye ’smat prasannā tvam bhavethāḥ sarvadāmbike
4.37 Through Your power of abundance, O Ambikā, be ever gracious unto us!”’
ṛṣir uvāca
4.38 The seer said:
48
iti prasāditā de vair jagato ’rthe tathātmanaḥ tathety uktvā Bhadrakālī babhuvāntarhitā nṛpa
4.39 “O king, thus propitiated by the Gods for the world’s sake and for their own, Bhadrakālī said, ‘So let it be,’ and vanished from sight.
ity etat kathitaṁ bhūpa sambhūtā sā yathā purā Devī devaśarīrebhyo jagattrayahitaiṣinī
4.40 So is it told, O king, how She came forth long ago from the bodies of the Gods, the Devī Who desires the wellbeing of the three worlds.
punaś ca Gaurīdehāt sā samudbhūtā yathābhavat vadhāya duṣṭadaityānām tathā śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ
4.41 I shall relate further how, for the destruction of Śumbha and Niśumbha and other wicked daityas, She appeared from the body of Gaurī,
rakṣanāya ca lokānāṁ devānām upakāriṇī tac chṛṇuṣva mayākhyātaṁ yathāvat kathayāmi te
4.42 the benefactor of the Gods, for the protection of the three worlds. Hear me tell it. I shall relate it to you as it happened.”
49
Chapter 5: The Devī’s Conversation with the Messenger
OṀ klīm ṛṣir uvāca
5.1 OṀ klīm. The seer said:
purā śumbhanisumbhābhyām asurābhyāṁ śacīpateḥ trailokyaṁ yajñabhāgāś ca hṛtā madabalāśrayāt
5.2 “Long ago, grown arrogant with power, the asuras Śumbha and Niśumbha seized Indra’s sovereignty over the three worlds and his share of the sacrifices.
tāv eva sūryatām tadvad adhikāraṁ tathaindavam kauberam atha yāmyarṁ ca cakrāte varuṇasya ca
5.3 In like manner they usurped the authority of the sun and the moon, and that of Kubera, Yama, and Varuṇa—the lords of wealth, death, and the ocean.
50
tāv eva pavanarddhiṁ ca cakratur vahnikarma ca tato devā vinirdhūtā bhraṣṭarājyāḥ parājitāḥ
5.4 They seized the wind god’s power and Agni’s functions. The gods were defeated, deposed, and driven out.
hṛtādhikārās tridaśās tābhyāṁ sarve nirākṛtāḥ mahāsurābhyāṁ tāṁ Devīṁ saṁsmaranty aparājitāṁ
5.5 Stripped of their powers and cast out by those two great asuras, all the gods remembered the invincible Devī.
tayāsmākaṁ varo datto yathāpatsu smṛtākhilāḥ bhavatāṁ nāśayiṣyāmi tatkṣaṇāt paramāpadaḥ
5.6 ‘She granted us a boon, saying, “Whenever you remember Me in times of distress, from that very moment I will put an end to all your worst calamities.’”
iti kṛtvā matiṁ devā himavantaṁ nageśvaram jagmus tatra tato Devīm viṣṇumāyām pratuṣṭuvuḥ
5.7 With that in mind, the gods went to Himālaya, the lord of mountains, and there praised the Devī, Who is Viṣṇumāyā.
devā ūcuḥ
5.8 The gods said:
namo Devyai MahāDevyai śivāyai satataṁ namaḥ namaḥ prakṛtyai bhadrāyai niyatāḥ praṇatāḥ sma tām
5.9 ‘Salutation to the Devī, to the great Devī. Salutation always to Her Who is auspicious. Salutation to Her Who is the primordial cause, to Her Who is gracious. With minds intent, we bow down to Her.
raudrāyai namo nityāyai Gauryai dhātryai namo namaḥ jyotsnāyai cendurūpiṇyai sukhāyai satataṁ namaḥ
51
5.10 Salutation to Her Who is terrible. To Gaurī, the eternal, shining one; to Her Who sustains the universe, salutations again and again. Salutation always to Her Who is moonlight, Who has the form of the moon and is blissful.
kalyāṇyai praṇatā vṛddhyai siddhyai kurmo namo namaḥ nairṛtyai bhūbhṛtām lakṣmyai śarvāṇyai te namo namaḥ
5.11 We bow to Her Who is auspicious beauty. We make salutations again and again to Her Who is prosperity and attainment. Salutations again and again to Her Who is the fortune and misfortune of kings, to Śarvāṇī, the consort of Śiva.
Durgāyai Durgapārāyai sārāyai sarvakāriṇyai khyātyai tathaiva kṛṣṇāyai dhūmrāyai satatam namaḥ
5.12 Salutation always to Durgā, Who takes us through difficulties, Who is the Creator and indwelling essence of all, Who is right knowledge, and Who also appears dark as smoke.
atisaumyātiraudrāyai natās taṣyai namo namaḥ namo jagatpratiṣṭhāyai Devyai kṛtyai namo namaḥ
5.13 We bow down to Her Who is at once most gentle and most fierce. Salutations to Her again and again. Salutation to the support of the world. To the Devī, Who is creative action, salutations again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu viṣṇumāyeti śabditā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.14-16 To the Devī, Who in all beings is called Viṣṇumāyā, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu cetanety abhidhīyate namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.17-19 To the Devī, Who in all beings is seen as consciousness, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
52
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu buddhirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.20-22 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of intelligence, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devi sarvabhūteṣu nidrārūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.23-25 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of sleep, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu kṣudhārūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.26-28 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of hunger, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu chāyārūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.29-31 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of shadow, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu śaktirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.32-34 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of power, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devi sarvabhūteṣu tṛṣṇārūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.35-37 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of thirst, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devi sarvabhūteṣu kṣāntirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
53
5.38-40 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of forgiveness, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu jātirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.41-43 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of order, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu lajjārūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.44-46 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of modesty, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu śāntirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.47-49 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of peace, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devi sarvabhūteṣu śraddhārūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.50-52 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of faith, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu kāntirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.53-55 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of loveliness, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devi sarvabhūteṣu lakṣmīrūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.56-58 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of good fortune, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
54
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu vṛttirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.59-61 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of activity, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu smṛtirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.62-64 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of memory, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devi sarvabhūteṣu dayārūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.65-67 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of compassion, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu tuṣṭirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.68-70 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of contentment, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu mātṛrūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.71-73 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of mother, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
yā Devī sarvabhūteṣu bhrāntirūpeṇa saṁsthitā namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.74-76 To the Devī, Who abides in all beings in the form of error, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
55
indriyāṇāṁ adhiṣṭhātrī bhūtānāṁ cākhileṣu yā bhūteṣu satataṁ tasyai vyāptidevyai namo namaḥ
5.77 To Her Who presides over the elements and the senses, and is ever present in all beings, to the all-pervading Devī, salutations again and again.
citirūpeṇa yā kṛtsnam etad vyāpya sthitā jagat namas tasyai namas tasyai namas tasyai namo namaḥ
5.78-80 To Her Who pervades this entire world and abides in the form of consciousness, salutation to Her, salutation to Her, salutation to Her again and again.
stutā suraiḥ pūrvam abhīṣṭasaṁśrayāt tathā surendreṇa dineṣu sevitā karotu sā naḥ śubhahetur īśvarī śubhāni bhadrāṇy abhihantu cāpadaḥ
5.81 Praised long ago by the gods for fulfilling their desires and likewise honored daily by the lord of the gods, may Īśvarī, the source of all good, create happiness and prosperity for us, and may She destroy our misfortunes.
yā sāmprataṁ coddhatadaityatāpitair asmābhir īsā ca surair namasyate yā ca smṛtā tat kṣaṇam eva hanti naḥ sarvāpado bhaktivinamramūrtibhiḥ
5.82 Tormented by arrogant daityas, we gods now honor Her, the supreme power. With bodies bowed down in devotion, at this moment we remember Her Who destroys all afflictions.’”
ṛṣir uvāca
5.83 The seer said:
evaṁ stavādiyuktānāṁ devānāṁ tatra Pārvatī snātum abhyāyayau toye jāhnavyā nṛpanandana
5.84 “O king, while the gods were thus engaged in praise and adoration, Pārvatī came to bathe in the waters of the Gaṇgā.
56
sābravīt tān surān subhrūr bhavadbhiḥ stūyate ’tra kā śarīrakośataś cāsyāḥ samudbhūtā ’bravīc chivā
5.85 She Who is fair of countenance asked the gods, ‘Whom are you praising?’ From Her own body an auspicious form emerged and replied:
stotraṁ mamaitat kriyate śumbhadaityanirākṛtaiḥ Devaiḥ sametaiḥ samare niśumbhena parājitaiḥ
5.86 ‘This hymn is an appeal to Me by those whom the daitya Śumbha cast out, by the assembled gods whom Niśumbha defeated in battle.’
śarīrakośād yat tasyāḥ Pārvatyā niḥsṛtāmbikā kauśikīti samasteṣu tato lokeṣu gīyate
5.87 And since Ambikā came forth from Pārvatī’s bodily form, She is glorified in all the worlds as Kauśikī.
tasyāṁ vinirgatāyāṁ tu kṛṣṇābhūt sāpi Pārvatī Kāliketi samākhyātā himācalakṛtāśrayā
5.88 Thereupon, Pārvatī became black. Thus known as Kālīkā, She makes Her abode in the Himālayas.
tato ’mbikāṁ paraṁ rūpaṁ bibhrāṇāṁ sumanoharam dadarśa caṇḍo muṇḍaś ca bhṛtyau śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ
5.89 Then Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, two servants of Śumbha and Niśumbha, beheld Ambikā’s captivating beauty.
tābhyāṁ śumbhāya cākhyātā sātīva sumanoharā kāpyāste strī mahārāja bhāsayantī himācalam
5.90 And they told Śumbha, ‘O great king, an unknown woman, surpassingly beautiful, dwells illuminating the Himālayas.
naiva tādṛk kvacid rūpaṁ dṛṣṭaṁ kenacid uttamam jñāyatāṁ kāpy asau devī gṛhyatāṁ cāsureśvara
57
5.91 Nowhere has anyone ever seen such supreme beauty. May you learn Who that goddess is and take possession of Her, O lord of asuras!
stnīratnam aticārvaṅgī dyotayantī diśas tviṣā sā tu tiṣṭhati daityendra tāṁ bhavān draṣṭum arhati
5.92 She abides there, a jewel among Women, fairest of limb, casting Her radiance in all directions. O chief of daityas, surely you must behold Her!
yāni ratnāni maṇayo gajāśvādīni vai prabho trailokye tu samastāni sāmprataṁ bhānti te gṛhe
5.93 Master, whatever gems and jewels, elephants, horses, and other riches exist in the three worlds, all those now enhance your dwelling.
airāvataḥ samānīto gajaratnaṁ purandarāt pārijātataruś cāyaṁ tathaivoccaiḥśravā hayaḥ
5.94 From Indra you have taken Airāvata, the jewel among elephants, and also the celestial coral tree and the horse Uccaiḥśravas.
vimānaṁ haṁsasaṁyuktam etat tiṣṭhati te ’ṅgaṇe ratnabhūtam ihānītaṁ yadāsīd vedhaso ’dbhutam
5.95 Taken from Brahmā, this wondrous jewel among chariots, yoked with swans, stands here in your courtyard.
nidhir eṣa mahāpadmaḥ samānīto dhaneśvarāt kiñjalkinīṁ dadau cābdhir mālām amlānapaṅkajām
5.96 Seized from Kubera, the lord of wealth, is his treasure. And the lord of the ocean has relinquished his garland of unfading lotuses.
chatraṁ te vāruṇaṁ gehe kāñcanasrāvi tiṣṭhati tathā ’yaṁ syandanavaro yaḥ purāsīt prajāpateḥ
5.97 Varuṇa’s umbrella, which showers down gold, now stands in your house along with this best of chariots, which once was Prajāpati’s.
58
mṛtyor utkrāntidā nāma śaktir īśa tvayā hṛtā pāśaḥ salilarājasya bhrātus tava parigrahe
5.98 Master, you have taken Yama’s spear, which grants departure from this life. Varuṇa’s noose is among your brother’s possessions.
niśumbhasyābdhijātāś ca samastā ratnajātayaḥ vahniś cāpi dadau tubhyam agniśauce ca vāsasī
5.99 To Niśumbha belong all manner of gems born of the sea. And to the two of you, Agni has given garments purified by his own fire.
evaṁ daityendra ratnāni samastany āhṛtāni te strīratnam eṣā kalyāṇi tvayā kasmān na gṛhyate
5.100 Thus, O chief of daityas, you have appropriated all things of value. Why then do you not seize this jewel among Women for yourself?’”
ṛṣir uvāca
5.101 The seer said:
niśamyeti vacaḥ śumbhaḥ sa tadā caṇḍamuṇḍayoḥ preṣayāmāsa sugrīvaṁ dūtaṁ devyā mahāsuram
5.102 “On hearing these words of Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, Śumbha sent the great asura Sugrīva as a messenger to the Devī.
iti ceti ca vaktavyā sā gatvā vacanān mama yathā cābhyeti samprītyā tathā kāryaṁ tvayā laghu
5.103 Instructing him, he said: ‘Go to Her and speak such words on my behalf that She will be delighted and will quickly come to me.’
sa tatra gatvā yatrāste śailoddeśe ’tiśobhane sā Devī tāṁ tataḥ prāha ślakṣṇam madhurayā girā
59
5.104 Sugrīva went there to the resplendent, craggy place where the Devī dwelt and spoke honeyed words to Her in unctuous tones.
dūta uvāca
5.105 The messenger said:
Devi daityeśvaraḥ śumbhas trailokye parameśvaraḥ duto ’haṁ preṣitas tena tvat sakāśam ihāgataḥ
5.106 ‘O Devī, in the three worlds Śumbha, the lord of daityas, is the supreme sovereign. I am his messenger. I have come here to your presence, sent by him
avyāhatājñaḥ sarvāsu yaḥ sadā devayoniṣu nirjitākhiladaityāriḥ sa yadāha śṛṇuṣva tat
5.107 Who has conquered all the enemies of the daityas and whose command is never resisted in the dwellings of the gods. Hear what he says:
mama trailokyam akhilaṁ mama devā vaśānugāḥ yajñabhāgān ahaṁ sarvān upāśnāmi pṛthak pṛthak
5.108 “All the three worlds are mine, and the gods submit to my will. I enjoy each one’s share of the sacrifices, every one of them.
trailokye vararatnāni mama vaśyāny aśeṣataḥ tathaiva gajaratnaṁ ca hṛtaṁ devendravāhanam
5.109 Indeed I possess all the finest gems in the three worlds, and I have taken Airāvata, the jewel among elephants and Indra’s mount.
kṣīrodamathanodbhūtam aśvaratnaṁ mamāmaraiḥ uccaiḥśravasasaṁmjñam tat praṇipatya samarpitam
5.110 The immortal gods, bowed down in reverence, offered me Uccaihśravas, the jewel among horses, born from the churning of the milk ocean.
60
yāni cānyāni deveṣu gandharveṣūrageṣu ca ratnabhūtāni bhūtāni tāni mayy eva śobhane
5.111 And whatever else is precious among the gods and celestial beings, all that is mine, O fair one.
strīratnabhūtām tvāṁ Devi loke manyāmahe vayam sā tvam asmān upāgaccha yato ratnabhujo vayam
5.112 We think of you, O Goddess, as the jewel among Women in the world, which indeed You are. Come to us, for we take pleasure in all the finest things.
mām vā mamānujaṁ vāpi niśumbham uruvikramam bhaja tvam cañcalāpāṅgi ratnabhūtāsi vai yataḥ
5.113 Choose either me or my valiant younger brother, Niśumbha, for with Your flashing eyes You are truly a jewel.
paramaiśvaryam atulam prāpsyase matparigrahāt etad buddhyā samālocya matparigrahatām vraja
5.114 By taking me you will obtain dominion beyond compare. With reasoning mind, consider this well and become my wife.’””
ṛṣir uvāca
5.115 The seer said:
ity uktā sā tadā Devī gambhīrāntaḥsmitā jagau Durgā Bhagavatī Bhadrā yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat
5.116 “Thus addressed, the Devī smiled inscrutably. The blessed, auspicious Durgā, Who supports the universe, spoke.
Devy uvāca
5.117 The Devī said:
61
satyam uktaṁ tvayā nātra mithyā kiñcit tvayoditam trailokyādhipatiḥ śumbho niśumbhaś cāpi tādṛśaḥ
5.118 ‘You have spoken the truth; there is nothing false in what you have said. Śumbha is the ruler of the three worlds, and so also is Niśumbha.
kiṁ tvatra yat parijñātam mithyā tat kriyate katham śrūyatām alpabuddhitvāt pratijñā yā kṛtā purā
5.119 But how can I go back on My word? Hear of the vow I once made out of foolishness:
yo māṁ jayati saṅgrāme yo me darpaṁ vyapohati yo me pratibaio loke sa me bhartā bhaviṣyati
5.120 He alone Who conquers Me in battle, Who removes My pride, Who equals My strength in the world, will become My husband.
tadāgacchatu śumbho ’tra niśumbho vā mahāsuraḥ māṁ jitvā kiṁ cireṇātra pāṇim gṛhṇātu me laghu
5.121 Therefore let Śumbha or the great asura Niśumbha come here. Why delay? Having conquered Me, let him take my hand in marriage.’
dūta uvāca
5.122 The messenger said:
avaliptāsi maivaṁ tvaṁ devi brūhi mamāgrataḥ trailokye kaḥ pumāṁs tiṣṭhed agre śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ
5.123 ‘You are arrogant, O Devī. Speak not so in my presence. What man in the three worlds surpasses Śumbha and Niśumbha?
anyeṣām api daityānāṁ sarve devā na vai yudhi tiṣṭhanti sammukhe Devi kim punaḥ strī tvam ekikā
62
5.124 Even against the other daityas, all the gods cannot stand face to face in battle, O Devī. How then can You, Who are one Woman alone?
indrādyāḥ sakalā devās tasthur yeṣām na saṁyuge śumbhādīnāṁ kathaṁ teṣām strī prayāsyasi sammukham
5.125 Indra and all the other gods could not resist Śumbha and the other demons in battle. How will You, a woman, go forth and confront them?
sā tvaṁ gaccha mayaivoktā pārśvaṁ śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ keśākarṣaṇanirdhūtagauravā mā gamiṣyasi
5.126 As I have said, go to Śumbha and Niśumbha’s side. Suffer not the indignity of being dragged there by your hair.’
Devy uvāca
5.127 The Devī said:
evam etad balī śumbho niśumbhaś cātivīryavān kiṁ karomi pratijñā me yad anālocitā purā
5.128 ‘So must it be. Śumbha is mighty and Niśumbha is exceedingly heroic, but what can I do? My rash vow was made long ago.
sa Tvaṁ gaccha mayoktaṁ te yad etat sarvam ādṛtaḥ tad ācakṣvāsurendrāya sa ca yuktaṁ karotu yat
5.129 Go back and tell the chief of asuras exactly what I have said. And let him do what is fitting.’”
63
Chapter 6: The Slaying of Dhūmralocana
ṛṣir uvāca
6.1 The seer said:
ity ākamya vaco Devyāḥ sa dūto ’marṣapūritaḥ samācaṣṭa samāgamya daityarājāya vistarāt
6.2 “On hearing the Devī’s words, the messenger was filled with indignation. He returned to the king of the daityas and related everything in great detail.
tasya dūtasya tad vākyam ākarṇyāsurarāṭ tataḥ sakrodhaḥ prāha daityānām adhipaṁ dhūmralocanam
6.3 On hearing his messenger’s report, the asura king grew enraged and said to Dhūmralocana, the chieftain of the daityas:
he dhūmralocanāśu tvaṁ svasainyaparivāritaḥ tām ānaya balād duṣṭāṁ keśākarṣaṇavihvalām
64
6.4 ‘Dhūmralocana, hasten with your army and bring that vile woman here by force, dragging her by the hair, kicking and screaming.
at paritrāṇadah kaścid yadi vottiṣṭhate ’parah sa hantavyo ’maro vāpi yakṣo gandharva eva vā
6.5 If anyone rises up to save her, even a god or other celestial being, he is to be slain.’”
ṛṣir uvāca
6.6 The seer said:
tenājñaptas tataḥ śīghraṁ sa daityo dhūmralocanaḥ vṛtaḥ ṣaṣṭyā sahasrāṇām asurāṇām drutaṁ yayau
6.7 “Commanded thus by Śumbha, the daitya Dhūmralocana quickly set off, accompanied by sixty thousand asuras.
sa dṛṣṭvā tāṁ tato Devīṁ tuhinācalasaṁsthitām jagādoccaiḥ prayāhīti mūlaṁ śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ
6.8 And when he saw the Devī stationed on the snowy mountain, he thundered, ‘Come to the presence of Śumbha and Niśumbha.
na cet prītyādya bhavatī madbhartāram upaiṣyati tato balān nayāmy eṣa keśākarṣaṇavihvalām
6.9 And if Her highness will not come in gladness to my master now, then I will take Her by force, dragging Her by the hair, kicking and screaming.’
Devy uvāca
6.10 The Devī said:
65
daityeśvareṇa prahito balavān balasamvṛtaḥ balān nayasi mām evaṁ tataḥ kiṁ te karomy aham
6.11 ‘You who are sent by the lord of the daityas are mighty yourself and accompanied by your army. If you take me by force, what can I do to you?’”
ṛṣir uvāca 
6.12 The seer said:
ity uktaḥ so ’bhyadhāvat tāṁ asuro dhūmralocanaḥ huṅkāreṇaiva taṁ bhasma sā cakārāmbikā tataḥ
6.13 “Thus addressed, the asura Dhūmralocana rushed at Her. Thereupon, with a contemptuous outcry, Ambikā reduced him to ashes.
atha kruddhaṁ mahāsainyam asurāṇāṁ tathāmbikām vavarṣa sāyakais tīkṣṇais tathā śaktiparaśvadhaiḥ
6.14 The great army of asuras, now provoked, rained sharp arrows, spears, and axes upon Ambikā.
tato dhutasaṭaḥ kopāt kṛtvā nādaṁ subhairavam papātāsurasenāyāṁ siṁho Devyāḥ svavāhanaḥ
6.15 Then the lion, the Devī’s mount, angrily shook its mane. Emitting a terrifying roar, it fell upon the demon army.
āṁścit karaprahāreṇa daityān āsyena cāparān ākrāntyā cādhareṇānyān sa jaghāna mahāsurān
6.16 With blows of its paws, it slew some daityas and crushed others in its jaws. And it trampled other great asuras under its hind legs.
keṣāñcit pāṭayāmāsa nakhaiḥ koṣṭhāni kesarī tathā talaprahāreṇa śirāṁsi kṛtavān pṛthak
66
6.17 With its claws, the lion tore into the entrails of some and beheaded others with the stroke of a paw.
vicchinnabāhuśirasaḥ kṛtās tena tathāpare papau ca rudhiraṁ koṣṭhād anyeṣām dhutakesaraḥ
6.18 It tore the arms and heads off others still, and tossing its mane, it lapped up the blood from the bellies of others.
kṣaṇena tad balaṁ sarvaṁ kṣayaṁ nītaṁ mahātmanā tena kesariṇā Devyā vāhanenātikopinā
6.19 In an instant that noble, infuriated lion which bore the Devī wreaked destruction on all that army.
śrutvā tam asuraṁ Devyā nihataṁ dhūmralocanam balaṁ ca kṣayitaṁ kṛtsnaṁ Devīkesariṇā tataḥ
6.20 When he heard that the Devī had slain the asura Dhūmralocana and that Her lion had destroyed his entire army,
cukopa daityādhipatiḥ śumbhaḥ prasphuritādharaḥ ājñāpayāmāsa ca tau caṇḍamuṇḍau mahāsurau
6.21 Śumbha, the king of daityas, shook with rage. His lower lip quivering, he commanded the two great asuras, Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa:
he caṇḍa he muṇḍa balair bahulaiḥ parivāritau tatra gacchataṁ gatvā ca sā samānīyatāṁ laghu
6.22 ‘Caṇḍa! Muṇḍa! Go there with immense forces, and bring Her here at once,
keśeṣvākṛṣya baddhvā vā yadi vaḥ saṁsayo yudhi tadāśeṣāyudhaiḥ sarvair asurair vinihanyatām
6.23 seizing Her by the hair or tying Her up. But if you hesitate to do this, then let all the asuras with all their weapons strike Her down in battle.
67
tasyāṁ hatāyāṁ duṣṭāyām simhe ca vinipātite śīghram āgamyatāṁ baddhvā gṛhītvā tāṁ athāmbikām
6.24 When that vile Woman has been wounded and Her lion slain, seize Her, bind Her, and bring Her here without delay!”’
68
Chapter 7: The Slaying of Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa
ṛṣir uvāca 
7.1 The seer said:
ājñaptāste tato daityāś caṇḍamuṇḍapurogamāḥ caturaṅgabalopetā yayur abhyudyatāyudhāḥ
7.2 “Headed by Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, the daityas’ fourfold army of elephants, charioteers, cavalry, and infantry went forth at Śumbha’s command, brandishing weapons.
dadṛśus te tato Devīm īṣaddhāsāṁ vyavasthitām simhasyopari śailendraśṛṅge mahati kāñcane
7.3 They saw The Devī Smiling Gently, Seated Upon Her Lion Atop the great, golden peak of the highest mountain.
te dṛṣtvā tāṁ samādātum udyam añcakrur udyatāḥ ākṛṣṭacāpāsidharās tathānye tat samīpagāḥ
69
7.4 Seeing Her, they contrived to Carry Her Off. While some approached with swords drawn and bows poised in readiness,
tataḥ kopaṁ cakāroccair Ambikā tān arīm prati kopena cāsyā vadanaṁ maṣīvarṇam abhūt tadā
7.5 Ambikā cried out angrily against those foes, and In Wrath Her Face Turned As Black As Ink.
bhrukuṭīkuṭilāt tasyā lalāṭaphalakād drutam Kālī karālavadanā viniṣkrāntāsipāśinī
7.6 From Her Scowling Brow, Kālī Sprang Forth, Frightful Of Countenance And Armed With Sword And Noose,
vicitrakhaṭvāṅgadharā naramālāvibhūṣaṇā dvīpicarmaparīdhānā śuṣkaṁāmsātibhairavā
7.7 Bearing A Strange Skull-Topped Staff, Adorned With A Garland Of Skulls, And Clad In A Tiger’s Skin. Her Emaciated Flesh Appalling,
ativistāravadanā jihvālalanabhīṣaṇā nimagnāraktanayanā nādāpūritadiṅmukhā
7.8 Her Mouth Gaping, Her Lolling Tongue Horrifying, Her Sunken Eyes Glowing red, She Filled the four quarters of the sky With Her Roars.
sā vegenābhipatitā ghātayantī mahāsurān sainye tatra surāriṇām abhakṣayata tad balam
7.9 Swiftly Falling Upon the great asuras in that army, She Slew And Devoured Those hosts of the Gods’ foes.
pārṣṇigrāhāṅkuśagrāhiyodhaghaṇṭāsamanvitān samādāyaikahastena mukhe cikṣepa vāraṇān
7.10 Attacking the rear guard and Seizing the elephants with their drivers, warriors, and bells, She Flung them Into Her Mouth With A Single Hand.
tathaiva yodhaṁ turagai rathaṁ sārathinā saha nikṣipya vaktre daśanaiś carvayaty atibhairavam
70
7.11 In like Manner, She Tossed the cavalry with its horses and the charioteers with their chariots Into Her Mouth and Ground them Furiously Between Her Teeth.
ekaṁ jagrāha keśeṣu grivāyām atha cāparam pādenākramya caivānyam urasānyam apothayat
7.12 She Seized one asura by the hair and another by the throat. Crushing another Underfoot, She Slammed yet another Against Her breast.
tair muktāni ca śastrāṇi mahātrāṇi tathāsuraiḥ mukhena jagrāha ruṣā daśanair mathitāny api
7.13 The weapons and great missiles the asuras hurled She Caught In Her Mouth and Ground Angrily Between Her Teeth.
balināṁ tad balaṁ sarvam asurāṇāṁ durātmanām mamardābhakṣayac cānyān anyāṁś cātāḍayat tathā
7.14 All that army of mighty and evil-natured asuras She Ravaged, Devouring some and Beating others Severely.
asinā nihatāḥ kecit kecit khaṭvāṅgatāḍitāḥ jagmur vināśam asurā dantāgrābhihatās tathā
7.15 She Struck Down some With Her Sword and Battered others with Her Skull-Topped Staff. Other asuras met their destruction Between Her Gnashing Teeth.
kṣaṇena tad balaṁ sarvam asurāṇāṁ nipātitam dṛṣṭvā caṇḍo ’bhidudrāva tāṁ Kālīm atibhīṣaṇām
7.16 When Caṇḍa saw the entire army of asuras swiftly struck down, he rushed at The Terrifying Kālī.
śaravarṣair mahābhīmair bhīmākṣīm tāṁ mahāsuraḥ chādayāmāsa cakraiś ca muṇḍaḥ kṣiptaiḥ sahasraśaḥ
7.17 With a formidable deluge of arrows, that great asura engulfed The Glowering Kālī while Muṇḍa hurled discuses at Her by the thousands,
tāni cakrāṇy anekāni viśamānāni tan mukham babhur yathā ’rkabimbāni subahūni ghanodaram
71
7.18 myriad discuses That Entered Her Mouth as so many solar orbs vanishing into the denseness of a cloud.
ato jahāsātiruṣā bhīmaṁ bhairavanādinī Kālī karālavaktrāntar durdarśadaśanojjvalā
7.19 With A Terrifying Roar, Kālī Laughed In Fury, Her Fearsome Teeth Gleaming Within Her Ghastly Mouth.
utthāya ca mahāsimhaṁ Devī Daṇḍam adhāvata gṛhītvā cāsya keśeṣu śiras tenāsinācchinat
7.20 Mounting Her Great Lion, The Devī Rushed at Caṇḍa, seized him by the hair, and Severed his head With Her Sword.
atha muṇḍo ’bhyadhāvat tāṁ dṛṣṭvā caṇḍam nipātitam tam apyapātayad bhūmau sā khaḍgābhihataṁ ruṣā
7.21 Seeing Caṇḍa slain, Muṇḍa attacked Her. She Pushed him to the ground and Struck him In Fury With Her Sword.
hataśeṣam tataḥ sainyaṁ dṛṣṭvā caṇḍaṁ nipātitam muṇḍaṁ ca sumahāvīryaṁ diśo bheje bhayāturam
7.22 Seeing Caṇḍa and also the most valorous Muṇḍa slain, the remaining army panicked and fled in all directions.
śiraś caṇḍasya Kālī ca gṛhītvā muṇḍam eva ca prāha pracaṇdāṭṭahasamiśram abhyetya Caṇḍikām
7.23 And Kālī, Grasping the heads of Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, Approached Caṇḍikā. Mingling Fierce, Loud Laughter With Her Words, She Said:
mayā tavātropahṛtau caṇḍamuṇḍau mahāpaśū yuddhayajñe Svayaṁ śumbhaṁ niśumbhaṁ ca haniṣyasi
7.24 ‘I Here Present To You Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa As Two Great Offerings in the sacrifice of battle. You Yourself Shall Slay Śumbha and Niśumbha.’”
ṛṣir uvāca
7.25 The seer said:
72
tāv ānītau tato dṛṣṭvā caṇḍamuṇḍau mahāsurau uvāca Kālīṁ kalyāṇī lalitaṁ Caṇḍikā vacaḥ
7.26 “When She Saw Those two great asuras, Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa, Brought Before Her, The Auspicious Caṇḍikā Spoke These Playful Words To Kālī:
yasmāc caṇḍaṁ ca muṇḍaṁ ca gṛhītvā Tvam upāgatā Cāmuṇḍeti tato loke khyātā Devi bhaviṣyasi
7.27 ‘Because You Have Overpowered Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa And Delivered Them To Me, You, O Devī, Will Henceforth Be Known In The World As Cāmuṇḍā.’”
73
Chapter 8: The Slaying of Raktabīja
ṛṣir uvāca
8.1 The seer said
caṇḍe ca nihate daitye muṇḍe ca vinipātite bahuleṣu ca sainyeṣu kṣayiteṣv asureśvaraḥ
8.2 “After Caṇḍa was killed, Muṇḍa slain, and the vast armies annihilated, the lord of asuras
tataḥ kopaparādhīnacetāḥ śumbhaḥ pratāpavān udyogaṁ sarvasainyānām daityānām ādideśa ha
8.3 burned with rage. His reason overcome, Śumbha ordered the marshaling of all the demon hosts:
74
adya sarvabalair daityāḥ ṣaḍaśītir udāyudhāḥ kambūnāṁ caturasītir niryāntu svabalair vṛtāḥ
8.4 ‘Now let the daitya clans with all their troops go forth, the eighty-six Udāyudha and the eighty-four Kambu families, together with their forces.
koṭivīryāṇi pañcāśad asurāṇāṁ kulāni vai śataṁ kulāni dhaumrāṇāṁ nirgacchantu mamājnayā
8.5 Let the fifty Koṭivīrya families and the hundred Dhaumra clans depart at my command
kālakā daurhṛdā mauryāḥ kālakeyās tathāsurāḥ yuddhāya sajjā niryāntu ājñayā tvaritā mama
8.6 So also at my command, let the Kālaka, Daurhṛda, Maurya, and Kālakeya asuras set out in haste, armed for battle.’
ity ājñāpyāsurapatiḥ śumbho bhairavaśāsanaḥ nirjagāma mahāsainyasahasrair bahubhir vṛtaḥ
8.7 Having issued his orders, Śumbha, the despotic lord of asuras, went forth, attended by many thousands of mighty troops.
āyāntaṁ Caṇḍikā dṛṣṭvā tat sainyam atibhīṣaṇam jyāsvanaiḥ pūrayāmāsa dharaṇīgaganāntaram
8.8 Seeing that most formidable army approach, Caṇḍikā filled the space between earth and sky with the resonance of Her bowstring
tataḥ siṁho mahānādam atīva kṛtavān nṛpa ghaṇṭāsvanena tān nādān Ambikā copabṛṁhayat
8.9 Thereupon her lion emitted a deafening roar, O king, and Ambikā heightened the noise with Her clanging bell.
75
dhanurjyāsiṁhaghaṇṭānāṁ nādāpūritadiṅmukhā ninādair bhīṣanaiḥ Kālī jigye vistāritānanā
8.10 Kālī drowned out the din of bowstring, lion, and bell, filling every direction with terrifying howls from Her gaping mouth.
taṁ ninādam upaśrutya daityasainyaiś caturdiśam Devī siṁhas tathā Kālī saroṣaiḥ parivāritāḥ
8.11 Hearing the tumult, the enraged demon armies closed in on the Devī, her lion, and Kālī from all four sides.
etasminn antare bhūpa vināśāya suradviṣām bhavāyāmarasiṁhānām ativīryabalānvitāḥ
8.12 O king, at that very moment, to insure the well-being of the supreme gods and to annihilate their adversaries, surpassingly brave and powerful
brahmeśaguhaviṣṇūnāṁ tathendrasya ca śaktayaḥ śarīrebhyo viniṣkramya tadrūpaiś Caṇḍikāṁ yayuḥ
8.13 śaktis, the gods’ embodied powers, sprang forth from the bodies of Brahmā, Śiva, Skanda, Viṣṇu, and Indra, mirroring the form of each. They approached Caṇḍikā.
yasya devasya yadrūpaṁ yathā bhūṣaṇavāhanam tad vad eva hi tac chaktir asurān yoddhum āyayau
8.14 Whatever that god’s form was, whatever his adornments and his mount, in that very form his śakti went forth to combat the asuras.
haṁsayuktavimānāgre sākṣasūtrakamaṇḍaluḥ āyātā brahmaṇaḥ śaktir Brahmāṇī sābhidhīyate
8.15 In a celestial chariot drawn by swans, Brahmā’s śakti came forth with prayer beads and waterpot in hand. She is called Brahmāṇī.
76
Māheśvarī vṛṣārūḍhā triśūlavaradhāriṇī mahāhivalayā prāptā candrarekhāvibhūṣaṇā
8.16 Māheśvarī arrived astride a bull, holding the finest trident, wearing great serpents for bracelets, and adorned with the crescent moon.
Kaumārī śaktihastā ca mayūravaravāhanā yoddhum abhyāyayau daityān Ambikā guharūpiṇī
8.17 Ambikā, having the war god’s form and riding a fine peacock, came forth as Kaumārī with spear in hand to fight against the daityas.
tathaiva Vaiṣṇavī śaktir garuḍopari saṁsthitā śaṅkhacakragadāśārngakhaḍgahastābhyupāyayau
8.18 Likewise the śakti Vaiṣṇavī, mounted on Garuda, approached holding conch, discus, mace, bow, and sword.
yajñavārāham atulaṁ rūpaṁ yā bibhrato hareḥ śaktiḥ sāpyāyayau tatra Vārāhīṁ bibhratī tanum
8.19 The śakti of Hari, who bears the unique form of the sacrificial boar, came forward as Vārāhī in that boarlike aspect.
nārasiṁhī nṛsiṁhasya bibhratī sadṛśaṁ vapuḥ prāptā tatra saṭākṣepakṣiptanakṣatrasaṁhatiḥ
8.20 Nārasirhhī, resembling Viṣṇu’s embodiment as a man-lion, arrived there, scattering the constellations with the toss of Her mane.
vajrahastā tathaivaindrī gajarājopari sthitā prāptā sahasranayanā yathā śakrastathaiva sā
8.21 Thousand-eyed like Indra, and in like manner with thunderbolt in hand, Aindrī arrived riding on the lord of elephants.
77
tataḥ parivṛtas tābhir īśāno devaśaktibhiḥ hanyantām asurāḥ śīghraṁ mama prītyāha Caṇḍikām
8.22 Then Śiva, surrounded by those śaktis of the gods, said to Caṇḍikā, ‘Let the asuras quickly be slain for My satisfaction.’
tato devīśarīrāt tu viniṣkrāntātibhīṣaṇā caṇḍikāśaktir atyugrā śivāśataninādinī
8.23 Thereupon from the Devī’s body there issued forth Caṇḍikā’s Own terrifying śakti, savage in her fury and howling like a hundred jackals.
sā cāha dhūmrajaṭilam īśānam aparājitā dūtas tvaṁ gaccha bhagavan pārśvaṁ śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ
8.24 And She, the unvanquished one, said to Śiva of dark, matted locks, ‘Go, My lord, as My messenger to Śumbha and Niśumbha.
brūhi śumbhaṁ niśumbhaṁ ca dānavav atigarvitau ye cānye dānavās tatra yuddhāya samupasthitāḥ
8.25 Say to those two arrogant dānavas, Śumbha and Niśumbha, and to the other dānavas assembled there for battle:
trailoyam indro labhatāṁ devāḥ santu havirbhujaḥ yūyaṁ prayāta pātālaṁ yadi jīvitum icchatha
8.26 “Indra must regain the three worlds, the gods must again enjoy the sacrificial oblations, and you must return to the nether world if you wish to live.
balāvalepād atha ced bhavanto yuddhakāṅkṣiṇaḥ tadāgacchata tṛpyantu macchivāḥ piśitena vaḥ
8.27 But if through the conceit of strength you are desirous of battle, then come and let My jackals be satiated with your flesh!”’
78
yato niyukto dautyena tayā Devyā śivaḥ svayam śivadūtīti loke ’smiṁs tataḥ sā khyātimāgatā
8.28 Since the Devī appointed Śiva himself as messenger, she has come to be known in this world as Śivadūtī.
te ’pi śrutvā vaco Devyāḥ sarvākhyātaṁ mahāsurāḥ amarṣāpūritā jagmur yataḥ Kātyāyanī sthitā
8.29 Hearing Śiva declare the Devī’s words, the great asuras were filled with indignation and went to where Kātyāyanī stood.
tataḥ prathamam evāgre śaraśaktyṛṣṭivṛṣṭibhiḥ vavarṣur uddhatāmarṣās tāṁ Devīṁ amarārayaḥ
8.30 At the outbreak of battle, the gods’ adversaries, arrogant in their anger, rained torrents of arrows, spears, and lances upon the Devī.
sā ca tān prahitān bāṇāñ chūlaśaktiparaśvadhān ciccheda līlayādhmātadhanurmuktair maheṣubhiḥ
8.31 And She, with great arrows shot from Her resounding bow, playfully split asunder their hurtling arrows, lances, spears, and axes.
tasyāgratas tathā Kālī śūlapātavidāritān khaṭvāṅgapothitāṁś cārīn kurvatī vyacarat tadā
8.32 Kālī roamed about the battlefront, slashing Her enemies to shreds with Her spear and crushing them with Her skull-topped staff
kamaṇḍalujalākṣepahatavīryān hataujasaḥ Brahmāṇī cākaroc chatrān yena yena sma dhāvati
8.33 And Brahmāṇī, wherever She went, left Her enemies sapped of strength, disabled by the holy water sprinkled from Her waterpot.
79
Māheśvarī triśulena tathā cakreṇa Vaiṣṇavi daityāñ jaghāna Kaumārī tathā śaktyātikopanā
8.34 Māheśvarī slew the daityas with Her trident; so, too, did Vaiṣṇavī with Her discus, Kaumārī with Her spear, and the wrathful
aindrī kuliśapātena śataśo daityadānavāḥ petur vidāritāḥ pṛthvyāṁ rudhiraughapravarṣiṇaḥ
8.35 Aindrī with Her thunderbolt. Daityas and dānavas, tom asunder, fell by the hundreds, discharging torrents of blood upon the earth.
tuṇḍaprahāravidhvastā daṁṣṭrāgrakṣatavakṣasaḥ vārāhamūrtyā nyapataṁś cakreṇa ca vidāritāḥ
8.36 They fell, scattered by blows from Vārāhī’s boarlike snout, pierced through the chest by Her tusks, and ripped apart by Her discus.
nakhair vidāritāmś cānyān bhaksayantī mahāsurān Nārasiṁhī cacārājau nādāpūrṇadigambarā
8.37 Nārasiṁhī, tearing other great asuras apart with Her claws and devouring them, roamed about the battlefield, filling the sky with Her roars.
caṇḍāṭṭahāsair asurāḥ śivadūty abhidūṣitāḥ petuḥ pṛthivyāṁ patitāṁs tāṁś cakhādātha sā tadā
8.38 Dazed by Śivadūtī’s violent laughter, the asuras fell to the ground, and She devoured those fallen ones.
iti mātṛgaṇaṁ kruddhaṁ mardayantaṁ mahāsurān dṛṣtvābhyupāyair vividhair neśur Devārisainikāḥ
8.39 When the enemy troops saw the enraged band of Mothers crushing the mighty asuras by diverse means, they fled.
80
palāyanaparān dṛṣṭvā daityān mātṛgaṇārditān yoddhum abyāyayau kruddho raktabījo mahāsuraḥ
8.40 Seeing the remaining daityas flee, tormented thus by the band of Mothers, the great asura Raktabīja went forth in anger to do battle.
raktabindur yadā bhūmau pataty asya śarīrataḥ samutpatati medinyāṁ tatpramāṇas tadāsuraḥ
8.41 Whenever a drop of blood fell from his body to the ground, an asura of like measure would rise up from the earth.
yuyudhe sa gadāpāṇir indraśaktyā mahāsuraḥ tataś Caindrī svavajreṇa raktabījam aṭādayat
8.42 With club in hand the great asura fought with Indra’s śakti. Then Aindrī struck Raktabīja with Her thunderbolt.
kuliśenāhatasyāśu bahu susrāva śoṇitam samuttasthus tato yodhās tadrūpās tatparākramāḥ
8.43 Blood streamed in torrents from the stricken asura, and from that blood rose up warriors of identical form and might.
yāvantaḥ patitās tasya śarīrād raktabindavaḥ tāvantaḥ puruṣā jātās tadvīryabalavikramāḥ
8.44 As many drops of blood fell from his body, so many beings of equal valor, strength, and courage arose,
te cāpi yuyudhus tatra puruṣā raktasambhavāḥ samaṁ māṭrbhir atyugraśastrapātātibhīṣaṇam
8.45 and those who sprang up from his blood battled there with the Mothers ever more fiercely, hurling the most formidable of weapons.
81
punaś ca vajrapātena kṣatam asya siro yadā vavāha raktaṁ puruṣās tato jātāḥ sahasraśaḥ
8.46 When the Devī’s thunderbolt struck Raktabīja’s head, blood flowed again, and from it asuras were born by the thousands
vaiṣṇavī samare cainaṁ cakreṇābhijaghāna ha gadayā tāḍayāmāsa Aindrī tam asureśvaram
8.47 In the combat Vaiṣṇavī attacked the lord of asuras with Her discus, and Aindri beat him with Her mace.
vaiṣṇavīcakrabhinnasya rudhirāsravasambhavaiḥ sahasraśo jagad vyāptaṁ tatpramāṇair mahāsuraiḥ
8.48 Blood flowed from the cuts of Vaiṣṇavī’s discus, and there from great asuras of equal measure arose by the thousands and filled the world.
śaktyā jaghāna Kaumārī Vārāhī ca tathāsinā Māheśvarī triśūlena raktabījaṁ mahāsuram
8.49 Kaumārī with her spear, Vārāhī with her sword, and Māheśvarī with her trident struck the great asura Raktabīja,
sa cāpi gadayā daityaḥ sarvā evāhanat pṛthak mātṝḥ kopasamāviṣṭo raktabījo mahāsuraḥ
8.50 and he, the mighty, rage-filled daitya, struck all the Mothers one by one with his club.
tasyāhatasya bahudhā śaktiśūlādibhir bhuvi papāta yo vai raktaughas tenāsañ chataśo ’surāḥ
8.51 Out of the blood that streamed upon the earth from the relentless wounds of spear, lance, and other weapons, asuras sprang up by the hundreds,
82
taiś cāsurāsṛksambhūtair asuraiḥ sakalaṁ jagat vyāptam āsīt tato devā bhayam ājagmur uttamam
8.52 and those demons born from this one demon’s flowing blood pervaded all the world. Utter terror seized the gods.
tān viṣaṇṇān surān dṛṣṭvā Caṇḍikā prāhasat tvarā uvāca kālīṁ Cāmuṇḍe vistīrṇaṁ vadanaṁ kuru
8.53 Caṇḍikā burst into laughter at their despair and said to Kālī, ‘O Cāmuṇḍā, open wide your mouth
macchastrapātasambhūtān raktabindūn mahāsurān raktabindoḥ pratīccha tvaṁ vaktreṇānena vegitā
8.54 and quickly drink in the drops of blood from my weapons’ blows and the great asuras born therefrom.
bhakṣayantī cara raṇe tadutpannān mahāsuran evam eṣa kṣayaṁ daityaḥ kṣīṇarakto gamiṣyati
8.55 Roam about on the battlefield and devour the great demons sprung from Raktabīja. So shall this daitya, drained of blood, go to his destruction.
bhakṣyamāṇās tvayā cogrā na cotpatsyanti cāpare ity uktvā tāṁ tato Devī śūlenābhijaghāna tam
8.56 As you consume those fierce asuras, others shall not arise.’ Having spoken thus, the Devī attacked Raktabīja with her lance,
mukhena Kālī jagṛhe raktabījasya śoṇitam tato ’sāvājaghānātha gadayā tatra Caṇḍikām
8.57 while Kālī avidly lapped up his blood. Raktabīja turned upon Caṇḍikā with his club,
83
na cāsyā vedanāṁ cakre gadāpāto ’lpikām api tasyāhatasya dehāt tu bahu susrāva śoṇitam
8.58 but his cudgel blows caused Her not even the slightest pain. From his beaten body blood flowed copiously
yatas tatas tad vaktreṇa Cāmuṇḍā sampratīcchati mukhe samudgatā ye ’syā raktapātān mahāsurāḥ
8.59 in every direction, and Cāmuṇḍā engulfed it with Her mouth. And within Her mouth those great asuras who sprang into being from the flow,
tāṁś cakhādātha cāmuṇḍā papau tasya ca śoṇitam
8.60 those She now devoured, even while drinking Raktabīja’s blood.
Devī śūlena vajreṇa bāṇair asibhir ṛṣṭibhiḥ jaghāna raktabījaṁ taṁ Cāmuṇḍāpītaśoṇitam
8.61 The Devī assailed Raktabīja with lance, thunderbolt, arrows, swords, and spears while Cāmuṇḍā drank his blood.
sa papāta mahīpṛṣṭhe śastrasaṁghasamāhataḥ nīraktaś ca mahīpāla raktabījo mahāsuraḥ
8.62 O king, battered by that array of weapons and drained of blood, the great asura Raktabīja toppled to the ground.
tatas te harṣam atulam avāpus tridaśā nṛpa tēṣāṁ mātṛgaṇo jāto nanartāsṛṅmadoddhataḥ
8.63 The gods attained immeasurable joy, O king, and the band of Mothers born from them danced about, intoxicated with blood.”
84
Chapter 9: The Slaying of Niśumbha
Rājovāca
9.1 The king said:
vicitram idam ākhyātaṁ bhagavan bhavatā mama Devyāś caritamāhātmyaṁ raktabījavadhāśritam
9.2 “Wonderful is this, revered sir, that you have told me about the Devī’s glorious deed in slaying Raktabīja.
bhūyaś cecchāmy ahaṁ śroturṁ raktabīje nipātite cakāra śumbho yatkarma niśumbhaś cātikopanaḥ
9.3 I wish to hear more about what Śumbha and the wrathful Niśumbha did after Raktabīja was killed.”
ṛṣir uvāca
9.4 The seer said:
85
cakāra kopām atulaṁ raktabīje nipātite śumbhāsuro niśumbhaś ca hateṣv anyeṣu cāhave
9.5 “After Raktabīja was killed and the others slain in battle, Śumbha and Niśumbha fell into unparalleled rage.
hanyamānaṁ mahāsainyaṁ vilokyāmarṣam udvahan abhyadhāvan nisumbho ’tha mukhyayāsurasenayā
9.6 Seeing that his mighty army was being slaughtered, Niśumba was overcome with fury and rushed forward with the best of his demon forces.
tasyāgratas tathā pṛṣṭhe pārśvayoś ca mahāsurāḥ sandaṣṭauṣṭhapuṭāḥ kruddhā hantuṁ Devīm upāyayuḥ
9.7 In front of him, behind him, and on both sides, great asuras, their lips compressed in anger, advanced to slay the Devī.
ājagāma mahāvīryaḥ śumbho ’pi svabalair vṛtaḥ nihantuṁ Caṇḍikāṁ kopāt kṛtvā yuddhaṁ tu mātṛbhiḥ
9.8 Having battled the Mothers, Śumbha, mighty in valor and surrounded by his forces, came forward in fury to attack the Devī.
tato yuddham atīvāsīd Devyā śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ śaravarṣam atīvograṁ meghayor iva varṣatoḥ
9.9 Fierce fighting erupted between them, and like two thunderclouds, Śumbha and Niśumbha rained down torrents of arrows on the Devī.
cicchedāstāñ charāṁs tābhyāṁ Caṇḍikā svaśarotkaraiḥ tāḍayāmāsa cāṅgeṣu śastraughair asureśvarau
9.10 Caṇḍikā intercepted them with Her Own volley of arrows and struck the demon chiefs in the limbs with a stream of weapons.
niśumbho niśitam khaḍgaṁ carma cādāya suprabham atāḍayan mūrdhni simhaṁ Devyā vāhanam uttamam
9.11 Niśumbha, seizing his sharpened spear and shining shield, struck the lion, the Devī’s magnificent mount, on the head.
86
tāḍite vāhane Devī kṣurapreṇāsim uttamam niśumbhasyāśu ciccheda carma cāpyaṣṭacandrakam
9.12 Her lion assaulted, the Devī swiftly cut through Niśumbha’s superb sword with Her razor-sharp arrow and through his shield, emblazoned with eight moons.
chinne carmaṇi khaḍge ca śaktiṁ cikṣepa so ’suraḥ tām apy asya dvidhā cakre cakreṇābhimukhāgatām
9.13 His shield and sword broken, the asura hurled his spear, and as it came toward Her, that, too, the Devī cut in half with Her discus.
kopādhmāto niśumbho ’tha śūlam jagrāha dànavaḥ āyāntaṁ muṣṭipātena Devī tac cāpy acūrṇayat
9.14 Blustering with rage, the dānava Niśumbha seized his lance, and as it came flying, the Devī crushed it with a blow of Her fist.
āvidhyātha gadām so ’pi cikṣepa Caṇḍikām prati sāpi Devyā triśūlena bhinnā bhasmatvam āgatā
9.15 Then swinging his club, Niśumbha flung it at Caṇḍikā. The Devī’s trident reduced it to ashes.
tataḥ paraśuhastaṁ tam āyāntaṁ daityapuṅgavam āhatya Devī bāṇaughair apātayata bhūtale
9.16 After wounding the onrushing demon chief with ax in hand, the Devī forced him to the ground with a volley of arrows.
tasmin nipātite bhūmau niśumbhe bhīmavikrame bhrātary atīva samkruddhaḥ prayayau hantum Ambikām
9.17 When he saw Niśumbha, his brother of fearsome strength, lying fallen on the ground, Śumbha moved forward, greatly enraged, to slay Ambikā.
sa rathasthas tathāty uccair grhītaparamāyudhaiḥ bhujair aṣṭābhir atulair vyāpyāśeṣaṁ babhau nabhaḥ
9.18 Standing in his chariot and holding aloft magnificent weapons, he shone forth and filled the entire sky with his eight incomparable arms
87
tam āyāntaṁ samālokya Devī śankham avādayat jyāśabdaṁ cāpi dhanuṣaś cakārātīva duḥsaham
9.19 While She watched him approach, the Devī sounded Her conch, set off an unbearable reverberation with Her bowstring,
pūrayāmāsa kakubho nijaghaṇṭāsvanena ca samastadaityasainyānām tejovadhavidhāyinā
9.20 and filled the firmament with the ringing of Her bell, which sapped the strength of the assembled demon armies.
tataḥ siṁho mahānādais tyājitebhamahāmadaiḥ pūrayāmāsa gaganaṁ gāṁ tathopadiśo daśa
9.21 Then the lion filled every direction with great roars that caused even the elephants’ mighty prowess to falter.
tataḥ Kālī samutpatya gaganaṁ kṣmām atāḍayat karābhyāṁ tan ninādena prāksvanāste tirohitāḥ
9.22 Kālī sprang skyward and alighted, pounding the earth with Her two hands. The noise drowned out all the previous sounds.
aṭṭāṭṭahāsam aśivam śivadūtī cakāra ha taiḥ śabdair asurās tresuḥ śumbhaḥ kopaṁ paraṁ yayau
9.23 Śivadūtī laughed loudly and menacingly. When the asuras grew terrified at the sounds, Śumbha flew into a monstrous rage.
durātmaṁs tiṣṭha tiṣṭheti vyājahārāmbikā yadā tadā jayety abhihitaṁ devair ākāśasaṁsthitaiḥ
9.24 Ambikā cried out for him, that evil-natured one, to stop, and the gods cheered Her on to victory from their positions in the sky.
śumbhenāgatya yā śaktir muktā jvālātibhīṣaṇā āyāntl vahnikūṭābhā sā nirastā maholkayā
9.25 But Śumbha approached and hurled a fearsome, flaming spear, an oncoming mass of fire that the Devī’s own firebrand warded off.
88
siṁhanādena śumbhasya vyāptaṁ lokatrayāntaram nirghātaniḥsvano ghoro jitavān avanīpate
9.26 Śumbha’s leonine roar pervaded the space between heaven, earth, and the netherworld, but the Devī’s violent thunderclap drowned it out, O king.
śumbhamuktāñ charān Devī śumbhas tatprahitān charān ciccheda svaśarair ugraiḥ śataśo ’tha sahasraśaḥ
9.27 The Devī split Śumbha’s flying arrows with sharp arrows of Her own, and likewise he split Hers, each discharging arrows by the hundreds and thousands.
tataḥ sā Caṇḍikā kruddhā śūlenābhijaghāna tam sa tadābhihato bhūmau mūrcchito nipapāta ha
9.28 Then the enraged Caṇḍikā pierced Śumbha with Her lance. Wounded, he fainted and fell to the ground.
tato niśumbhah samprāpya cetanām āttakārmukaḥ ājaghāna śarair Devīṁ Kālīṁ kesariṇaṁ tathā
9.29 Meanwhile Niśumbha, regaining consciousness, seized his bow and shot arrows at theDevī, Kālī, and the lion.
punaś ca kṛtvā bāhūnām ayutaṁ danujeśvaraḥ cakrāyudhena ditijaś chādayāmāsa Caṇḍikām
9.30 And then, creating ten thousand arms for himself, the daitya chief, that son of Diti, engulfed Caṇḍikā with ten thousand discuses.
tato Bhagavatī kruddhā Durgā Durgārtināśiṇī ciccheda tāni cakrāṇi svaśaraiḥ sāyakāṁś ca tān
9.31 Thus provoked, the glorious Durgā, who destroys adversity and afflictions, cut through his discuses and missiles with arrows of Her own.
tato niśumbho vegena gadām ādāya Caṇḍikām abhyadhāvata vai hantuṁ daityasenāsamāvṛtaḥ
9.32 Niśumbha, surrounded by his demon army, swiftly seized his club and rushed at Caṇḍikā to kill Her.
89
tasyāpatata evāśu gadāṁ ciccheda Caṇḍikā khaḍgena śitadhāreṇa sa ca śūlaṁ samādade
9.33 Instantly She split the onrushing Niśumbha’s club with Her keen-edged sword. He grasped his lance,
śūlahastaṁ samāyāntaṁ niśumbham amarārdanam hṛdi vivyādha śūlena vegāviddhena Caṇḍikā
9.34 and as he approached with weapon in hand, Caṇḍikā pierced him, the afflictor of the gods, through the heart with a swiftly hurled spear.
bhinnasya tasya śūlena hṛdayān niḥsṛto ’paraḥ mahābalo mahāvīryas tiṣṭheti puruṣo vadan
9.35 From his heart’s gaping wound came forth another mighty and valorous being, who shouted for the Devī to stop.
tasya niṣkrāmato Devī prahasya svanavat tataḥ śiraś ciccheda khaḍgena tato ’sāvapatad bhuvi
9.36 Bursting into derisive laughter, She severed his head with Her sword, and the figure who had thus emerged fell to the ground.
tataḥ siṁhaś cakhādogradaṁṣṭrākṣuṇṇaśirodharān asurāṁs tāṁs tathā Kālī śivadūtī tathāparān
9.37 The lion then devoured the asuras whose necks it had crushed with its fearsome fangs, while Kālī and Śivadūtī devoured others.
Kaumārīśaktinirbhinnāḥ kecin neśur mahāsurāḥ brahmāṇīmantrapūtena toyenānye nirākṛtāḥ
9.38 Great asuras perished, pierced through by Kaumārī’s spear; others shrank away from the water sanctified by Brahmāṇī’s mantras.
māheśvarītriśūlena bhinnāḥ petus tathāpare Vārāhītuṇḍaghātena kecic cūrṇīkṛtā bhuvi
9.39 Others fell, ripped open by Māheśvarī’s trident; some lay on the ground, smashed by the blows of Vārāhī’s snout.
90
khaṇḍaṁ khaṇḍaṁ ca cakreṇa vaiṣṇavyā dānavāḥ kṛtāḥ vajreṇa caindrīhastāgravimuktena tathāpare
9.40 Dānavas were cut to pieces, some by Vaiṣṇavī’s discus and others by the thunderbolt discharged from Aindrī’s fingertips.
kecid vineśur asurāḥ kecin naṣṭā mahāhavāt bhakṣitāś cāpare Kālīśivadūtīmṛgādhipaiḥ
9.41 Some asuras perished, some fled from the great battle, and others were devoured by Kālī, Śivadūtī, and the lion.”
91
Chapter 10: The Slaying of Śumbha
ṛṣir uvāca
10.1 The seer said:
niśumbhaṁ nihataṁ dṛṣṭvā bhrātaraṁ prāṇasammitam hanyamānaṁ balaṁ caiva śumbhaḥ kiuddho ’bravld vacaḥ
10.2 “Seeing the lifeless body of Niśumbha, the brother who was as dear to him as life itself, and seeing his forces being slaughtered, the enraged Śumbha spoke these words:
balāvalepaduṣṭe tvam Mā Durge garvam āvaha anyāsāṁ balam āśritya yuddhyase yātimāninī
10.3 ‘O Durgā, who are corrupt with the arrogance of power, do not show your pride here, for though you are haughty, you fight depending on the strength of others.’
Devy uvāca
92
10.4 The Devī said:
Ekaivāham jagaty atra dvitīyā kā mamāparā paśyaitā duṣṭa mayy eva viśantyo madvibhūtayaḥ
10.5 ‘I Am Alone Here in the world. Who else is there besides Me? Behold, O vile one! These are but Projections of My Own Power, now Entering Back into Me.’
tataḥ samastās tā Devyo Brahmāṇīpramukhā layam tasyā Devyās tanau jagmur ekaivāsīt Tadāmbikā
10.6 Thereupon All Those Goddesses, Led By Brahmāṇī, Merged Into The Devī’s Body. Then Ambikā Alone Remained.
Devy uvāca
10.7 The Devī Said:
Ahaṁ vibhūtyā bahubhir iha rūpair yadāsthitā tat saṁhṛtaṁ Mayaikaiva tiṣṭhāmy ājau sthiro Bhava
10.8 ‘I have Now Withdrawn the Many Forms I Inhabited Here, Projected by My power. I Stand Alone. Be resolute in combat.’”
ṛṣir uvāca
10.9 The seer said:
tataḥ pravavṛte yuddhaṁ Devyāḥ śumbhasya cobhayoḥ paśyatāṁ sarvadevānām asurāṇāṁ ca dāruṇam
10.10 “Then a horrific battle broke out between the two of them, the Devī and Śumbha, while all the Gods and asuras looked on.
śaravarṣaiḥ śitaiḥ śastrais tathāstraiś caiva dāruṇaiḥ tayor yuddham abhūd bhūyaḥ sarvalokabhayaṅkaram
10.11 With showers of arrows, sharp weapons, and terrifying missiles, the two met again in a combat that frightened all the world.
Divyāny astrāṇi śataśo mumuce yāny Athāmbikā babhañja tāni daityendras tatpratīghātakartṛbhiḥ
93
10.12 The Wondrous Weapons That Ambikā Now Unleashed by the hundreds, the daitya chief deflected with defensive strikes.
muktāni tena cāstrāṇi Divyāni Parameśvarī babhañja līlayaivograhuṅkāroccāraṇādibhiḥ
10.13 And the magic missiles that he hurled, the Supreme Devī Shattered Playfully With Fierce Cries of Contempt.
tataḥ śaraśatair Devīm ācchādayata so ’suraḥ sāpi tatkupitā Devī dhanuś ciccheda ceṣubhiḥ
10.14 Then the asura covered Her with hundreds of arrows. Provoked, the Devī Discharged Her arrows and Split his bow.
chinne dhanuṣi daityendras tathā śaktim athādade ciccheda Devī cakreṇa tām apy asya kare sthitām
10.15 His bow broken, the daitya chief took up his spear, but even as it rested in his hand, the Devī Cut Through it With Her Discus.
tataḥ khaḍgam upādāya śatacandraṁ ca bhānumat abhyadhāvat tadā Devīṁ daityānām adhipeśvaraḥ
10.16 Then, grasping his sword, emblazoned with a hundred moons, the supreme lord of the daityas rushed at the Devī.
tasyāpatata evāśu khaḍgaṁ ciccheda Caṇḍikā dhanurmuktaiḥ śitair bāṇaiś carma cārkakarāmalam
10.17 As he advanced, Caṇḍikā Broke his sword with sharp Arrows shot from Her bow, and also his shield that shone as the sun’s rays.
hatāśvaḥ sa tadā daityaś chinnadhanvā visārathiḥ jagrāha mudgaraṁ ghoram Ambikānidhanodyataḥ
10.18 His steed slain, his bow broken, his chariot wrecked, the daitya grasped his fearsome mace, intent on destroying Ambikā.
cicchedāpatatas tasya mudgaraṁ niśitaiḥ śaraiḥ tathāpi so ’bhyadhāvat tāṁ muṣṭim udyamya vegavān
10.19 With sharp Arrows, She Shattered the onrushing Śumbha’s mace. Still, he rushed at Her with fist upraised.
94
sa muṣṭim pātayāmāsa hṛdaye daityapuṅgavah Devyās taṁ cāpi sā Devī talenorasy atāḍayat
10.20 The daitya chief slammed his fist down on the Devī’s Heart, and She Struck him on the chest with Her Palm.
talaprahārābhihato nipapāta mahītale sa daityarājaḥ sahasā punareva tathotthitaḥ 
10.21 Struck by that blow, the demon king fell to the ground. At once, he rose up again,
utpatya ca pragṛhyoccair Devīṁ gaganam āsthitaḥ tatrāpi sā nirādhārā yuyudhe tena Caṇḍikā
10.22 and springing upward, he seized the Devī and ascended high into the sky. There in midair Caṇḍikā Battled with him.
niyuddhaṁ khe tadā daityaś Caṇḍikā ca parasparam cakratuḥ prathamaṁ siddhamunivismayakārakam
10.23 In the sky, the daitya and Caṇḍikā fought hand to hand as never before, to the astonishment of saints and sages.
tato niyuddhaṁ suciraṁ kṛtvā tenāmbikā saha utpāṭya bhrāmayāmāsa cikṣepa dharaṇītale
10.24 And after prolonged combat, Ambikā Snatched him up, swung him around, and Flung him to the earth.
sa kṣipto dharaṇīm prāpya muṣṭim udyamya vegataḥ abhyadhāvata duṣṭātmā Caṇḍikānidhanecchayā
10.25 Striking the ground, the evil one immediately raised his fist and ran forward, desirous of destroying Ambikā.
tam āyāntaṁ tato Devī sarvadaityajaneśvaram jagaty āṁ pātayāmāsa bhitvā śūlena vakṣasi
10.26 The Devī thrust Her Spear through his chest and Threw that onrushing lord of all demonic creatures to the ground.
95
sa gatāsuḥ papātorvyāṁ Devī śūlāgravikṣataḥ cālayan sakalāṁ pṛthvīṁ sābdhidvīpām saparvatām
10.27 Pierced through by The Devī’s Weapon, his life-breath gone, he fell to the ground, shaking all the earth together with its oceans, islands, and mountains.
tataḥ prasannam akhilaṁ hate tasmin durātmani jagat svāsthyam atīvāpa nirmalaṁ cābhavan nabhaḥ
10.28 When the evil one was slain, all the universe became calm, regaining its natural order, and the sky cleared.
utpātameghāḥ solkā ye prāgāsaṁs te śamaṁ yayuḥ sarito mārgavāhinyas tathāsaṁs tatra pātite
10.29 The flaming clouds of portent that formerly gathered now subsided, and rivers again flowed along their courses when Śumbha fell slain.
tato devagaṇāḥ sarve harṣanirbharamānasāḥ babhūvur nihate tasmin gandharvā lalitaṁ jaguḥ
10.30 All the hosts of Gods were overjoyed when he lay slain, and the celestial musicians sang sweetly.
avādayaṁs tathaivānye nanṛtuś cāpsarogaṇāḥ vavuḥ puṇyās tathā vātāḥ suprabho ’bhūd divākaraḥ
10.31 Others sounded their instruments, and throngs of heavenly nymphs danced. Favorable winds blew, and the sun shone in glory.
jajvaluś cāgnayaḥ śāntāḥ śāntadigjanitasvanāḥ
10.32 The sacred fires glowed peacefully, and the sounds born of the four directions faded away.”
96
Chapter 11: Hymn to Nārāyaṇī
ṛṣir uvāca
11.1 The seer said:
Devyā hate tatra mahāsurendre sendrāḥ surā vahnipurogamās tāṁ kātyāyanīṁ tuṣṭuvur iṣṭalābhād vikāsivaktrābjavikāsitāśāḥ
11.2 “After the Devī had slain the great asura chief, Indra and the other gods, led by Agni, praised Kātyāyanī for granting their wishes. With hopes fulfilled, their faces beamed.
Devi prapannārtihare prasīda prasīda mātar jagato ’khilasya prasīda viśveśvari pāhi viśvam tvam īśvarī Devi carācarasya
11.3 ‘O Devī, Who remove the sufferings of those who take refuge in you, be gracious. Be Gracious, Mother of the entire world. Be Gracious, Ruler of All. Protect the universe, O Devī, Who are the Ruler of the Moving and The Unmoving.
97
ādhārabhūtā jagatas tvam ekā mahīsvarūpeṇa yataḥ stithāsi apāṁ svarūpasthitayā tvayaitad āpyāyate kṛtsnam alaṅghyavīrye
11.4 You Alone Are The Sustaining Power Of The World, for You Abide In The Form Of The Earth. By You, Who Exist In The Form Of Water, all this universe prospers, O Devī Of Unsurpassable Strength.
tvaṁ Vaiṣṇavī śaktir anantavīryā viśvasya bījam paramāsi Māyā sammohitaṁ Devi samastam etat tvaṁ vai prasannā bhuvi muktihetuḥ
11.5 Of Boundless Might, You Are Viṣṇu’s Power, The Source Of All, The Supreme Māyā. Deluded, O Devī, is all this universe. In this world, You Alone, When Pleased, Are The Cause Of Liberation.
vidyāḥ samastās tava Devi bhedāḥ striyaḥ samastāḥ sakalā jagatsu tvayaikayā pūritam Ambayaitat kā te stutiḥ stavyaparāparoktiḥ
11.6 All Forms Of Knowledge Are Your Aspects, O Devī, as are All Women In The world. By You Alone, The Mother, Is This world filled. What praise can be sung to You Who Are Beyond Praise?
sarvabhūtā yadā Devī bhuktimuktipradāyinī Tvaṁ stutā stutaye kā vā bhavantu paramoktayaḥ
11.7 O Devī, Who Have Become All Things, Who Bestow Enjoyment And Liberation—when You are praised, what Words, however excellent, can extol You?
sarvasya buddhirūpeṇa janasya hṛdi saṁsthite svargāpavargade Devi Nārāyaṇī namo ’stu te
11.8 Salutation be To you, Devī Nārāyaṇī, Who Abide As Intelligence In The Hearts Of All Beings, Granting Heavenly Reward And Final Liberation.
kalākāṣṭhādirūpeṇa pariṇāmapradāyini viśvasyoparatau śakte Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.9 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Bring Change As The Moments Of Ever-Passing Time, Who Are The Power At The Cessation of the universe.
98
sarvamaṅgalamāṅgalye śive sarvārthasādhike saraṇye tryambake Gauri Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.10 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Are The Good Of All Good, The Auspicious One; To You Who Accomplish Every Intent; To You, The Refuge, The All-Knowing, Shining Gauri!
sṛṣṭisthitivināśānāṁ śaktibhūte sanātani Guṇāsraye Guṇamaye Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.11 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Are The Power Of Creation, Sustenance, And Destruction; Who Are Eternal; Who Are The Source And Embodiment Of The Threefold Energy.
śaraṇāgatadīnārtaparitrāṇaparāyaṇe sarvasyārtihare Devi Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.12 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Are Intent On Rescuing the distressed and afflicted that take refuge in You; to Tou, O Devī, Who Temove the suffering of all.
haṁsayuktavimānasthe Brahmāṇīrūpadhāriṇi kauśāmbhaḥkṣarike Devi Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.13 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Assume The Form Of Brahmāṇl, Riding In A Swanyoked Chariot, O Devī, And Sprinkling sanctified water.
triśūlacandrāhidhare Mahāvṛṣabhavāhini Māheśvarīsvarūpeṇa Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.14 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Have The Form Of Māheśvarl, Bearing trident, moon, and serpent, and Riding a mighty bull.
mayūrakukkuṭavṛte mahāśaktidhare ’naghe Kaumārīrūpasaṁsthāne Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.15 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Have The Form Of Kaumāri, The Faultless One attended by peacock and cock, and Bearing A Great Spear.
99
śaṅkhacakragadāśārṅgagṛhītaparamāyudhe prasīda Vaiṣṇavīrūpe Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.16 Salutation be To you, Nārāyaṇī, Who Have The Form Of Vaisṇavl, Holding The Supreme Weapons of conch, discus, mace, and bow. Be Gracious!
gṛhītogramahācakre daṁṣṭroddhṛtavasundhare Varāharūpiṇi śive Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.17 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Auspicious One, Who Have Viṣṇu’s Boarlike Form, Grasping A Great, Formidable Discus and Uplifting The Earth With Your tusks.
Nṛsiṁharūpeṇogreṇa hantuṁ daityān kṛtodyame trailokyatrāṇasahite Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.18 Salutation be To You, Nārāyanl, Who In The Ferocious Form Of The Man-Lion Are Intent On Killing the daityas and Protecting the three worlds.
kirīṭini mahāvajre sahasranayanojjvale vṛtraprāṇahare Caindri Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.19 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Are Adorned With Diadem, great thunderbolt, and Thousand-Eyed Radiance; to You, O Aindrī, Who Took the demon Vṛtra’s life-breath!
śivadūtīsvarūpeṇa hatadaityamahābale Ghorarūpe mahārāve Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.20 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who In The Form Of Śivadūtī, Of Frightful Visage and Piercing Shrieks, Slew the mighty demon army.
daṁṣṭrākarālavadane śiromālāvibhūṣaṇe Cāmuṇḍe muṇḍamathane Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.21 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Whose Mouth Bares Its Terrifying Teeth and Whose Neck Is Adorned With A Garland Of Skulls; To You, O Cāmuṇḍā, Destroyer of Muṇḍa!
Lakṣmi lajje mahāvidye śraddhe puṣṭi svadhe dhruve Mahārātri Mahāmāye Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
100
11.22 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Who Are Good Fortune, Modesty, Great Knowledge, Faith, Prosperity, Satisfaction to the ancestral spirits, Constancy, The Great Night, and The Great Illusion.
medhe Sarasvati vare bhūti bābhravi tāmasi niyate Tvaṁ prasīdeśe Nārāyaṇi namo ’stu te
11.23 Salutation be To You, Nārāyaṇī, Most Excellent Sarasvatī, Who Are Intelligence and Well-Being, The Divine Consort and The Dark One, Ever Constant. Be gracious, O You Who Are Supreme!
Sarvasvarūpe Sarveśe sarvaśaktisamanvite bhayebhyas trāhi no Devi Durge Devi namo ’stu te
11.24 O Devī, Who Exist In The Form Of All, Who Are The Ruler Of All, Possessing All Power, protect us from fears. O Devī Durgā, salutation be to You!
etat te vadanaṁ saumyaṁ locanatrayabhūṣitam pātu naḥ sarvabhūtebhyaḥ Kātyāyani namo ’stu te
11.25 May This Gentle Face Of Yours, Adorned With Three Eyes, protect us in every way. O Kātyāyanī, salutation be to you!
jvālākarālam atyugram aśeṣāsurasūdanam triśūlam pātu no bhlter Bhadrakāli namo ’stu te
11.26 May Your Terrible, Flaming Trident, Exceedingly Sharp and Destroying all asuras, protect us from dread. O Bhadrakālī, salutation be to You!
hinasti daityatejāṁsi svanenāpūrya yā jagat sā ghaṇṭā pātu no Devi pāpebhyo naḥ sutān iva
11.27 May Your bell that destroys the daityas’ life-force and fills the world with its ringing protect us from all evils, O Devī, even As A Mother Protects her children.
asurāsṛgvasāpaṇkacarcitas te karojjvalaḥ śubhāya khaḍgo bhavatu Caṇḍike Tvāṁ natā vayam
11.28 May Your Sword, smeared with the mire of asuras’ blood and fat and blazing as the sun’s rays, be for our welfare. O Caṇḍikā, we bow to You!
101
rogān aśesān apahaṁsi tuṣṭā ruṣṭā tu kāmān sakalān abhīṣṭān Tvām āśritānāṁ na vipannarāṇām tvām āśritā hy āśrayatāṁ prayānti
11.29 When pleased, You Destroy All Afflictions, but when Displeased, You Thwart all aspirations. No calamity befalls those who have taken refuge In You, and they who resort To You become a refuge to others.
etat kṛtaṁ yat kadanam tvayādya dharmadviṣām Devi mahāsurāṇām rūpair anekair bahudhātmamūrtiṁ kṛtvāmbike tat prakaroti kānyā
11.30 O Devī, Multiplying Your Own Form Into Many, You Have Wrought Destruction on the mighty asuras who hate righteousness. O Ambikā, Who Else can accomplish that?
vidyāsu śāstreṣu vivekadīpeṣv ādyeṣu vākyeṣu ca kā tvad anyā mamatvagarte ’timahāndhakāre vibhrāmayaty etad atīva viśvam
11.31 Who Other Than You Abides In All Forms of learning, In The Sacred Texts that Are Lights Of Understanding, In The Primordial Wisdom Of The Vedas? yet Who Else confounds this universe in the darkest abyss of attachment?
Rakṣāmsi yatrograviṣās ca nāgā yatrārayo dasyubalāni yatra dāvānalo yatra tathābdhimadhye tatra sthitā tvaṁ paripāsi viśvam
11.32 Where malevolent beings and venomous serpents lurk, where enemies and thieves abound, where forest conflagrations rage, there and even in mid-ocean You Stand And Protect the universe.
viśveśvari tvaṁ paripāsi viśvaṁ viśvātmikā dhārayasīti viśvam viśveśavandyā bhavatī bhavanti viśvāśrayā ye tvayi bhaktinamrāḥ
11.33 O Ruler Of The Universe, You Protect the universe. You Are The Essence Of all things, and You Support All that is. All kings must praise You, O Revered One, and those who bow to You in devotion become the refuge of all.
Devi prasīda paripālaya no ’ribhīter nityaṁ yathāsuravadhād adhunaiva sadyaḥ pāpāni sarvajagatāṁ praśamaṁ nayāśu utpātapākajanitāṁś ca mahopasargān
102
11.34 Be Gracious, O Devī. Even As You Have destroyed the asuras, protect us always from the fear of enemies. May You Subdue the evils of all the worlds and great disasters born of ominous portents.
praṇatānāṁ prasīda Tvaṁ Devi viśvārtihāriṇi trailokyavāsinām īḍye lokānām varadā bhava
11.35 To those who bow down To You, Be Gracious, O Devī, Who Remove the afflictions of all and Who Are Worthy of praise by the dwellers of the three worlds. Confer Your Boons Upon The Worlds.’
Devy Uvāca
11.36 The Devī Said:
Varadāhaṁ Suragaṇā Varaṁ Yan Manasecchatha Taṁ Vṛṇudhvaṁ Prayacchāmi Jagatām Upakārakam
11.37 ‘O hosts of gods, I Am The Giver Of Boons. whatever blessing is your heart’s desire, choose that, and I Will Grant it for the welfare of the world.’
devā ūcuḥ
11.38 The gods said:
sarvābādhāpraśamanaṁ trailokyasyākhilesvari evam eva tvayā kāryam asmadvairivināśanam 
11.39 ‘O Ruler of all, may You Allay all the miseries of the three worlds and so, too, annihilate our enemies.’
Devy Uvāca
11.40 The Devī Said:
Vaivasvate ’ntare Prāpte Aṣṭāvimśatime Yuge śumbho niśumbhaś caivānyāv utpatsyete mahāsurau
11.41 ‘When the twenty-eighth cycle in the age of the manu Vaivasvata has come, two other great asuras, also named Śumbha and Niśumbha, will arise.
103
Nandagopagṛhe jātā Yaśodāgarbhasambhavā tatas tau nāśayiṣyāmi vindhyācalanivāsinī
11.42 Then Shall I Be Born in the home of the Cowherd Nanda, brought forth From Yaśodā’s womb; and Dwelling in the Vindhya Mountains, I Shall Destroy the two asuras.
punar apy atiraudreṇa rūpeṇa pṛthivītale avatīrya haniṣyāmi vaipracittāṁs tu dānavān
11.43 Again, having Incarnated on earth in a surpassingly horrific form, I Shall Slay the demons descended from Vipracitti.
bhakṣayantyās ca tān ugrān vaipracittān mahāsurān Raktā Dantā bhaviṣyanti dāḍimīkusumopamāḥ
11.44 Upon Devouring those fierce asuras, My Teeth Will Become Red Like Pomegranate flowers.
tato māṁ Devatāḥ svarge Martyaloke ca mānavāḥ stuvanto vyāhariṣyanti satataṁ Raktadantikām
11.45 Thereafter, In Praise Of Me, The Gods in heaven and the humans in the mortal realm Will Forever Call Me Raktadantikā.
bhūyas ca śatavārṣikyām anāvṛṣṭyām anambhasi munibhiḥ saṁstutā bhūmau sambhaviṣyāmy ayonijā
11.46 Again, when no rain has fallen for a hundred years and there is no water on earth, Then Praised by sages, I Shall Appear, But Not Born Of A Womb.
tataḥ śatena netrāṇāṁ nirīkṣiṣyāmi yan munīn kīrtayiṣyanti manujāḥ śatākṣīm iti māṁ tataḥ
11.47 since I Shall Behold the Sages With A Hundred Eyes, humankind Will Glorify Me As Śatāksī.
104
tato ’ham akhilaṁ lokam ātmadehasamudbhavaiḥ bhariṣyāmi surāḥ śākair āvṛṣṭeḥ prāṇadhārakaiḥ
11.48 Causing the rains to fall, O gods, I Shall Support The Entire World With Life-Sustaining Vegetables Brought Forth From My Own Substance.
śākambharīti vikhyātiṁ tadā yāsyāmy ahaṁ bhuvi
11.49 Thus Shall I Be Celebrated On Earth As Śākambharī,
tatraiva ca vadhiṣyāmi durgamākhyaṁ mahāsuram Durgādevīti vikhyātaṁ tan me nāma bhaviṣyati
11.50 and then also shall I Slay a great asura called Durgama and thus come to be Celebrated As The Devī Durgā.
punaś cāhaṁ yadā bhīmaṁ rūpaṁ kṛtvā himācale Rakṣāmsi kṣayayiṣyāmi munlnāṁ trāṇakāraṇāt
11.51 again, when I Have Assumed A Terrible form in the Himālayas, I Shall Destroy malevolent beings for the protection of the Sages.
tadā māṁ munayaḥ sarve stoṣyanty ānamramūrtayaḥ Bhīmādevīti vikhyātaṁ tan Me Nāma bhaviṣyati
11.52 Then all the Sages, with bodies bowed, will Praise Me. Thus shall I come to be celebrated by the name of Bhīmadevī.
yadāruṇākhyas trailokye mahābādhāṁ kariṣyati Tadāhaṁ Bhrāmaraṁ Rūpaṁ kṛtvāsaṅkhyeyaṣaṭpadam
11.53 When a demon called Aruṇa wreaks great havoc in the three worlds, then shall I assume form as a Swarm Of Countless Bees
trailokyasya hitārthāya vadhiṣyāmi mahāsuram Bhrāmarīti ca māṁ lokāstadā stoṣyanti sarvataḥ
11.54 and Slay the great asura for the welfare of the three worlds. Thus will people everywhere extol Me as Bhrāmarī.
itthaṁ yadā yadā bādhā dānavotthā bhaviṣyati tadā tadāvatlryāhaṁ kariṣyāmy arisaṁkṣayam
105
11.55 And so, whenever danger arises from demonic sources, I shall Descend and bring about the complete destruction of enemies.’”
106
Chapter 12: The Promise of Blessings
Devy uvāca
12.1 The Devī said:
ebhiḥ stavaiś ca māṁ nityaṁ stoṣyate yaḥ samāhitah tasyāhaṁ sakalām bādhāṁ nāsayiṣyāmy asaṁśayam
12.2 “I shall without doubt destroy every misfortune of those who with collected mind will praise Me always with these hymns.
madhukaiṭabhanāśam ca mahiṣāsuraghātanam kīrtayiṣyanti ye tadvad vadhaṁ śumbhaniśumbhayoḥ
12.3 Those who recite the destruction of Madhu and Kaiṭabha, the killing of Mahiṣāsura, and the slaying of Śumbha and Niśumbha
aṣṭamyāṁ ca caturdaśyāṁ navamyāṁ caikacetasaḥ śroṣyanti caiva ye bhaktyā mama māhātmyam uttamam
107
12.4 with singleness of mind on the eighth, fourteenth, and ninth days of the lunar fortnight, and those who listen with devotion to this supreme poem of My glory
na teṣāṁ duṣkṛtaṁ kiñcid duṣkṛtotthā na cāpadaḥ bhaviṣyati na dāridryaṁ na caiveṣṭaviyojanam
12.5 will have no evil befall them, nor any misfortunes arising from wrongdoing. For them there will be neither poverty nor separation from loved ones,
śatruto na bhayaṁ tasya dasyuto vā na rājataḥ na śastrānalatoyaughāt kadācit sambhaviṣyati
12.6 nor danger from enemies, robbers, or kings. Nor at any time will danger arise from weapons, fire, or flood.
tasmān mamaitan māhātmyaṁ paṭhitavyaṁ samāhitaiḥ śrotavyaṁ ca sadā bhaktyā paraṁ svastyayanaṁ hi tat
12.7 Therefore this poem of My glory is to be recited by those of concentrated mind and heard always with devotion, for it is the supreme way to well-being.
upasargān aśeṣāṁs tu mahāmārīsamudbhavān tathā trividham utpātaṁ māhātmyaṁ śamayen mama
12.8 May this glorification of Mine put to rest all misfortunes born of pestilence, and also the three kinds of calamity.
yatraitat paṭhyate samyaṅ nityam āyatane mama sadā na tad vimokṣyāmi sānnidhyaṁ tatra me sthitam
12.9 Where it is always and rightly recited in My sanctuary, that place shall I never abandon. There My presence is abiding.
balipradāne püjāyām agnikārye mahotsave sarvaṁ mamaitac caritam uccāryaṁ śrāvyam eva ca
12.10 In the offering of oblations, in worship, in the fire ceremony, and in the great festival, all these deeds of Mine are to be proclaimed and heard.
jānatājānatā vāpi balipūjāṁ tathā kṛtām pratīcchiṣyāmy ahaṁ prītyā vahnihomaṁ tathākṛtam
12.11 When offerings are made in worship, with or without proper knowledge, I shall receive them gladly and also the fire oblation performed in like manner.
108
śaratkāle mahāpūjā kriyate yā ca vārṣikī tasyāṁ mamaitan māhātmyaṁ śrutvā bhaktisamanvitaḥ
12.12 At the great annual worship which is performed in the autumn season, those who hear this poem of My glory and are filled with devotion
sarvābādhāvinirmukto dhanadhānyasutānvitaḥ manuṣyo matprasādena bhaviṣyati na saṁśayaḥ
12.13 will be freed by My grace from all afflictions and endowed with wealth, grain, and progeny. Of this there is no doubt.
śrutvā mamaitan māhātmyaṁ tathā cotpattayaḥ śubhāḥ parākramaṁ ca yuddheṣu jāyate nirbhayaḥ pumān
12.14 Hearing of My glory, My auspicious manifestations, and My prowess in battles, they become fearless.
ripavaḥ samkṣayaṁ yānti kalyāṇaṁ copapadyate nandate ca kularh puṁsāṁ māhātmyaṁ mama śṛṇvatām
12.15 For those who hear My glorification, their adversaries go to utter destruction. Well-being comes to them, and their families rejoice.
śāntikarmaṇi sarvatra tathā duḥsvapnadarśane grahapīḍāsu cogrāsu māhātmyaṁ śṛṇuyān mama
12.16 For those troubled by nightmares or the ill-boding of stars, at rituals for averting evil this poem of My glory should always be heard.
upasargāḥ śamaṁ yānti grahapīḍāś ca dāruṇāḥ duḥsvapnaṁ ca nṛbhir dṛṣtaṁ susvapnam upajāyate
12.17 It causes misfortunes and evil portents to subside, and it turns nightmares into sweet dreams.
bālagrahābhibhūtānāṁ bālānāṁ śāntikārakam saṅghātabhede ca nṛṇāṁ maitrīkaraṇam uttamam
12.18 It pacifies children overcome by seizures, and wherever discord divides, it best restores friendship.
durvṛttānām aśeṣāṇāṁ balahānikaraṁ paraṁ rakṣobhūtapiśācānāṁ paṭhanād eva nāśanam
109
12.19 It is unsurpassed in diminishing the might of all evildoers. Truly its recitation brings about the destruction of fiends, ghosts, and ghouls.
sarvaṁ mamaitan māhātmyaṁ mama sannidhikārakam
12.20 This entire glorification of mine draws one near to Me.
paśupuṣpārghyadhūpaiś ca gandhadīpais tathottamaiḥ viprāṇāṁ bhojanair homaiḥ prokṣaṇīyair ahamiśam
12.21 As by the offerings of finest cattle, flowers, gifts, incense, perfumes, and lights, made day and night for a year; and as by the feeding of Brāhmaṇas, by oblations, by consecrated water;
anyaiś ca vividhair bhogaiḥ pradānair vatsareṇa yā prītir me kriyate sāsmin sakṛt sucarite śrute
12.22 and as by diverse other propitiations and offerings; so also by hearing the recital of My auspicious deeds am I pleased.
śrutaṁ harati pāpāni tathārogyaṁ prayacchati rakṣāṁ karoti bhūtebhyo janmanāṁ kīrtanaṁ mama
12.23 When heard, this poem of My glory removes impurities and grants freedom from disease. The relating of My births confers protection from evil spirits.
yuddheṣu caritaṁ yanme duṣṭadaityanibarhaṇam tasmiñc chrute vairikṛtaṁ bhayaṁ puṁsāṁ na jāyate
12.24 Since it recounts My deeds in battle, crushing the wicked daityas, when heard, it dispels all fear of enemies.
yuṣmābhiḥ stutayo yāś ca yāś ca brahmarṣibhiḥ kṛtāḥ brahmaṇā ca kṛtās tās tu prayacchanti śubhāṁ matim
12.25 Praises uttered by you and the Brāhmanical seers and by Brahmā himself produce an auspicious mind.
araṇye prāntare vāpi dāvāgniparivāritaḥ dasyubhir vā vṛtaḥ śūnye gṛhīto vāpi śatrubhiḥ
12.26 When in a forest, or on a lonely road, or surrounded by a forest fire, when encircled by robbers in a desolate place or seized by enemies,
110
simhavyāghrānuyāto vā vane vā vanahastibhiḥ rājñā kruddhena cājñapto vadhyo bandhagato ’pi vā
12.27 when stalked by lions and tigers or wild elephants in the jungle, when imprisoned or sentenced to death by a wrathful king,
āghūrṇito vā vātena sthitaḥ pote mahārṇave patatsu cāpi śastreṣu saṁgrāme bhṛśadāruṇe
12.28 when in a wind-tossed boat on the mighty sea or assailed by hurtling weapons in the midst of battle,
sarvābādhāsu ghorāsu vedanābhyardito ’pi vā smaran mamaitac caritam naro mucyeta saṅkaṭāt
12.29 when caught in dreadful straits or tormented with agony, whoever remembers these deeds of Mine is freed from danger.
mama prabhāvāt siṁhādyā dasyavo vairiṇas tathā dūrād eva palāyante smarataś caritaṁ mama
12.30 By My power, lions and beasts, robbers and enemies flee far away from one who remembers these deeds of mine.”
ṛṣir uvāca
12.31 The seer said:
ity uktvā sā Bhagavatī Caṇḍikā Caṇdavikramā paśyatām eva devānāṁ tatraivāntaradhīyata
12.32 “Having spoken thus, the blessed Caṇḍikā, fierce in valor, vanished from the sight of the gods.
te ’pi devā nirātaṅkāḥ svādhikārān yathā purā yajñabhāgabhujaḥ sarve cakrur vinihatārayaḥ
12.33 Their enemies struck down, the gods were delivered from affliction. They reclaimed their own dominions as before, and all partook of their shares in the sacrifices.
111
daityāś ca Devyā nihate śumbhe devaripau yudhi jagadvidhvamsini tasmin mahogre ’tulavikrame
12.34 As for the daityas, after the Devī had slain in battle those two enemies of the gods— Śumbha, the afflictor of the world, terribly fierce and unequaled in prowess,
niśumbhe ca mahāvīrye śeṣāḥ pātālam āyayuḥ 
12.35 and Niśumbha, great in valor—the rest of them returned to the netherworld.
evaṁ Bhagavatī Devī sā nityāpi punaḥ punaḥ sambhūya kurute bhūpa jagataḥ paripālanam
12.36 Thus, O king, does the blessed Devī, though eternal, manifest again and again for the protection of the world.
tayaitan mohyate viśvaṁ saiva viśvaṁ prasūyate sā yācitā ca vijñānaṁ tuṣṭā ṛddhiṁ prayacchati
12.37 By Her this universe is deluded. She Herself brings forth everything. Entreated, She bestows right knowledge; propitiated, She bestows prosperity.
vyāptaṁ tayaitat sakalaṁ brahmāṇḍaṁ manujeśvara mahākālyā mahākāle mahāmārīsvarūpayā
12.38 O king, by Her all this universe is pervaded, by Mahākālī, who takes form as the great destroyer at the end of time.
saiva kāle mahāmārī saiva sṛṣṭir bhavaty ajā sthitiṁ karoti bhūtānāṁ saiva kāle sanātanī
12.39 At that time, She herself is the great destroyer. Existing from all eternity, She herself becomes the creation. She, the eternal one, sustains all beings.
bhavakāle nṛṇāṁ saiva lakṣmīr vṛddhipradā gṛhe saivābhāve tathālakṣmīr vināśāyopajāyate
12.40 In times of well-being She is indeed good fortune, granting prosperity in the homes of humankind. In times of privation, She exists as misfortune, bringing about ruin.
stutā sampūjitā puṣpair dhūpagandhādibhis tathā dadāti vittaṁ putrāṁś ca matim dharme gatim śubhām
12.41 And so, praised and worshiped with flowers, incense, perfumes, and the like, She grants wealth, progeny, and a pure mind established in righteousness.”
112
Chapter 13: The Granting of Boons to Suratha and the Merchant
ṛṣir uvāca
13.1 The seer said:
etat te kathitaṁ bhūpa Devīmāhātmyam uttamam
13.2 “Thus have I related to you, O king, this supreme glorification of the Devī:
evamprabhāvā sā Devī yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat vidyā tathaiva kriyate bhagavadviṣṇumāyayā
13.3 Such is the splendor of the Devī, by whom the world is upheld, and such is the knowledge fashioned by the blessed Viṣṇumāyā.
113
tayā tvam eṣa vaiśyaś ca tathaivānye vivekinaḥ mohyante mohitāś caiva moham eṣyanti cāpare
13.4 By Her are you and this merchant and other thoughtful people deluded, just as others have been and will be deluded.
tām upaihi mahārāja śaraṇam parameśvarīm ārādhitā saiva nṛṇāṁ bhogasvargāpavargadā
13.5 O great king, take refuge in Her, the Supreme Sovereign. When worshiped, She truly confers enjoyment, heaven, and final liberation on humanity.”
mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
13.6 Mārkaṇḍeya said:
iti tasya vacaḥ śrutvā surathaḥ sa narādhipaḥ praṇipatya mahābhāgaṁ tam ṛṣiṁ saṁśitavratam
13.7 Hearing his words, Suratha the king bowed in reverence to the illustrious seer of steadfast austerities.
nirviṇṇo ’timamatvena rājyāpaharaṇena ca jagāma sadyas tapase sa ca vaiśyo mahāmune
13.8 Despondent over excessive attachment and the loss of his kingdom, he went at once to practice austerities, O great sage, and so did the merchant,
sandarśanārtham ambāyā nadīpulinasaṁsthitaḥ sa ca vaiśyas tapas tepe Devīsūktam paraṁ japan
13.9 that they might obtain a vision of the Mother. The king and the merchant settled on a riverbank and engaged in spiritual practice, chanting the supreme hymn to the Devī.
tau tasmin puline Devyāḥ kṛtvā mūrtiṁ mahīmayīm arhaṇāṁ cakratus tasyāḥ puṣpadhūpāgnitarpaṇaiḥ
13.10 When they had fashioned an earthen image Of Her on the riverbank, the two of them worshiped The Devī with flowers, incense, fire, and libations of water.
114
nirāhārau yatāhārau tanmanaskau samāhitau dadatus tau baliṁ caiva nijagātrāsṛgukṣitam
13.11 Now fasting, now restraining their senses, with minds constant in concentration, they made offerings sprinkled with the blood of their own bodies.
evaṁ samārādhayatos tribhir varṣair yatātmanoḥ parituṣṭā jagaddhātrī pratyakṣaṁ prāha Caṇḍikā
13.12 When they had worshiped Her in this way with self- restraint for three years, Caṇḍikā, The Support Of The Universe, Was Well Pleased. She Appeared Before Them And Spoke.
Devy uvāca
13.13 The Devī Said:
yat prārthyate tvayā bhūpa tvayā ca kulanandana
13.14 “That which you desire, O king, and you, the delight of your family,
mat tas tat prāpyatāṁ sarvaṁ parituṣṭā dadāmi tat
13.15 receive all that from Me. Well pleased, I will grant it.”
mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
13.16 Mārkaṇḍeya said:
tato vavre nṛpo rājyam avibhraṁśyanyajanmani atra caiva nijaṁ rājyaṁ hataśatrubalaṁ balāt
13.17 Thereupon the king chose a kingdom imperishable even in another lifetime and also his own kingdom here, to be reclaimed by force from his enemies’ control.
so ’pi vaiśyas tato jñānaṁ vavre nirviṇṇamānasaḥ mametyaham iti prājñaḥ saṅgavicyutikārakam
115
13.18 And then the wise merchant, dispassionate in mind, chose that knowledge which severs attachment from “I” and “mine.”
Devy Uvāca
13.19 The Devī Said:
svalpair ahobhir nṛpate svarājyaṁ prāpsyate bhavan
13.20 “In a few days, O king, you will reclaim your own kingdom.
hatvā ripūn askhalitaṁ tava tatra bhaviṣyati
13.21 When your enemies are slain, thenceforth it will assuredly be yours.
mṛtaś ca bhūyaḥ samprāpya janma devād vivasvataḥ
13.22 And after your death you will obtain another birth from the sun god Vivasvat.
sāvarṇiko nāma manur bhavān bhuvi bhaviṣyati
13.23 Dwelling on earth, you will become the lord of the age, the manu named Sāvarṇi.
vaiśyavarya tvayā yaś ca varo ’smatto ’bhivāñchitaḥ
13.24 And the boon that you, O best of merchants, desire,
tam prayacchāmi saṁsiddhyai tava jñānam bhaviṣyati
13.25 that do I grant you. The knowledge that leads to final liberation shall be yours.”
mārkaṇḍeya uvāca
13.26 Mārkaṇḍeya said:
116
iti datvā tayor Devī yathābhilaṣitaṁ varam babhūvāntarhitā sadyo bhaktyā tābhyām abhiṣṭutā
13.27 When She had given each his desired boon, The Devī, lovingly praised by both of them, vanished at once.
evaṁ Devyā varaṁ labdhvā surathaḥ kṣatriyarṣabhaḥ sūryāj janma samāsādya sāvarṇir bhavitā manuḥ
13.28 Thus, having received The Devī’s Boon, Suratha, the best of sovereigns will obtain birth from the sun god and will become the manu named Sāvarṇi,
sāvarṇir bhavitā manuḥ klīṁ OṀ
13.29 will become the manu named Sāvarṇi. Klīm OṀ.
srīsaptaśatīDevīmāhātmyaṁ samāptam
The Devīmāhātmya of seven hundred verses is concluded.
OṀ tat sat OṀ
117
CREDITS
Compilation Credits to www.DeviMahatmya.com
Other Credits:
1. In Praise of the Goddess – The Devimahatmya and Its Meaning, by Devadatta Kali
2. A picture book of the Devi Mahatmya, by Simon Ray (2016)